Atrial fibrillation (AF) patients frequently require polypharmacy, increasing the risk of drug-drug interactions and hepatotoxicity. We analyzed the use of drugs potentially associated with liver injury in anticoagulated AF patients. We applied the LiverTox classification to AF patients from the START registry, categorizing them based on the use of LiverTox A drugs (high risk of liver toxicity). Logistic regression was used to calculate the odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (95%CIs) for factors associated with the use of these drugs and their impact on liver function tests (LFTs). Median age was 81 years with 46% of women. 8,215 AF patients were taking 40,355 distinct molecules at enrolment, with a median of 5 drugs per patient (IQR 3-7). Overall, 3,416 (41.6%) received at least one LiverTox A drug. These patients were more often male, overweight, smokers, hypertensive, diabetic, with cardiovascular or cerebrovascular history, and on polypharmacy. The most commonly prescribed LiverTox A drugs were statins, amiodarone, and allopurinol, both in the overall population and within subgroups stratified by major cardiovascular conditions. In multivariable logistic regression, among LiverTox A drugs, amiodarone (OR 1.61, 95%CI 1.29-2.00) and methimazole (OR 1.83, 95%CI 1.04-3.03) were associated with elevated LFTs. Among frequently prescribed drugs, warfarin, furosemide, ramipril, lansoprazole, and canrenone were also associated with increased LFTs. Direct oral anticoagulants, compared to warfarin, showed a lower risk of increased LFTs after adjustment for confounders. In conclusion, many AF patients are treated with drugs at high risk of hepatotoxicity.

Background We aimed to investigate whether the mode of anesthesia— neuraxial versus general—used during cesarean delivery is associated with the risk of long-term neurodevelopmental disorders (LNDDs) in offspring. Methods We conducted a nationwide, population-based cohort study using data from the South Korean National Health Insurance Service. The study included 735 280 children born via cesarean delivery between January 1, 2010 and December 31, 2014. After applying 1:1 propensity score matching based on maternal receipt of neuraxial anesthesia (NA) versus general anesthesia (GA), 273 266 births were included in the matched cohort. The primary outcome was the diagnosis of LNDDs, including intellectual disabilities and psychological development disorders, through December 31, 2023. Incidence rates per 1000 person-years (PYs) and HRs with 95% CIs were estimated using Cox proportional-hazards models. Sensitivity analyses included multivariable Cox models in the full cohort and a within-family (discordant sibling) design. Results In the matched cohort, the incidence rate of LNDDs was 3.53 (95% CI, 3.45 to 3.62) per 1000 PYs in the NA group and 3.99 (95% CI, 3.90 to 4.09) per 1000 PYs in the GA group. NA was associated with a lower hazard of LNDDs (HR 0.87, 95% CI 0.84 to 0.90; p&lt;0.001). This association was consistent for intellectual disabilities (HR 0.83, 95% CI 0.78 to 0.88; p&lt;0.001) and for psychological development disorders (HR 0.88, 95% CI 0.85 to 0.91; p&lt;0.001). These associations remained consistent in both the full cohort analyses and the sibling comparison. Conclusions In this nationwide cohort, NA for cesarean delivery was associated with a modestly lower incidence and hazard of LNDDs compared with GA. These findings should be interpreted as exploratory and hypothesis-generating, rather than causal, and highlight the need for further research integrating detailed perinatal and anesthetic data.

Abstract Certain diseases require rapid treatment to avoid long-term consequences for patients. However, they may be difficult to recognize, especially if the symptoms are ambiguous and compatible with multiple possible diagnoses. Completing all necessary examinations often takes time, thereby prolonging patient suffering. Data-driven approaches, such as single-label classification (SLC) and multi-label classification (MLC), can help accelerate the diagnostic process and improve accuracy. These two approaches differ primarily in the number of classes they allow a sample to belong to: SLC assumes the classes being mutually exclusive so that each sample belongs to exactly one class whereas MLC supposes the classes being mutually inclusive, i.e. a sample can belong to several classes or none, acknowledging the possibility of comorbidities. Comparing SLC and MLC allows us to investigate whether disease recognition benefits from considering comorbidities. In this context, we aim to provide a conceptual framing of (differences between) the two approaches in model formulation, decision spaces and handling of class imbalance. To empirically assess their performance, we conduct a case study applying SLC and MLC to data from chronic pain patients. Our analysis yields an ambiguous picture of whether incorporating comorbidities improve disease recognition. The suitability of SLC and MLC is determined by multiple factors, notably the dependency structure among diseases and between diseases and covariates, as well as by data characteristics such as class imbalance. This highlights the importance of considering the specific characteristics of the data when selecting an appropriate classification approach for disease recognition and beyond.

Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) is a neurodegenerative disease characterized by abnormal accumulation of the protein tau in the brain, leading to motor and cognitive symptoms that vary between individuals. The reasons for this clinical heterogeneity are unknown. Here we show that distinct molecular forms of tau, particularly high molecular weight (HMW) assemblies, differ in abundance and biological activity across PSP brains. By combining biochemical examination, seed amplification assays, proteomic profiling, and spatial transcriptomics, we identify that HMW tau species drive the strongest aggregation activity in the primary motor cortex. Cases with high tau seeding activity display molecular signatures of altered immune and metabolic pathways. These findings reveal that tau seeding activity reflects underlying molecular heterogeneity in PSP and suggest that measuring 4R-tau seeding capacity could help stratify patients and guide the development of targeted therapeutic approaches.

ABSTRACT OBJECTIVES This study aimed to compare the mean perception scores of gingival display between dental professionals and non-professionals. METHODOLOGY A comparative cross-sectional study was conducted at Rehmat Memorial Hospital, Abbottabad, involving 60 participants: 30 non-professionals and 30 dental professionals, aged 18 to 50 years. Using non-probability consecutive sampling, individuals with intellectual disabilities, color vision deficiency, or dental training were excluded. Standardized photographs of a female subject were digitally edited in Adobe Photoshop CS6 to simulate gingival display levels ranging from 0 to 5 mm. Evaluators viewed each image for 1 minute and rated it on a 10-point visual analog scale, with 00 indicating the least attractive and 10 the most attractive. Dental professionals included general dentists without orthodontic specialization, while non-professionals were patients with no prior orthodontic treatment or dental education. The Mann-Whitney U test was used to compare group differences. Stratification was done based on age, gender, and education level. RESULTSThe mean age of dental professionals (33.73±5.15 years) was slightly higher than that of non-professionals (31.70±7.63 years), but not significantly (p=0.23). Gender distribution and educational backgrounds were comparable. Overall, non-professionals favored minimal gingival display, while dental professionals were more tolerant of increased gingival exposure. CONCLUSION Non-professionals and dental professionals differ significantly in their perception of gingival esthetics. These differences show the importance of patient-centered treatment planning and individualized aesthetic goals.

The 2024 medical education crisis in Korea renewed attention to medical students’ professional identity formation and underscored the importance of medical humanities education. Although humanities programs have expanded across Korean medical schools, their impact on student learning outcomes has not been systematically synthesized. This review examines empirical evidence on medical humanities interventions in Korean undergraduate medical education. Following PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses) 2020 guidelines, we searched PubMed, KoreaMed, KMBASE, and RISS for studies published between January 2000 and May 2025. Eligible studies reported empirical outcomes from interventions involving Korean undergraduate medical students. Program outcomes were categorized using the Best Evidence Medical Education-modified Kirkpatrick evaluation model. Of 121 records screened, 14 met the inclusion criteria. Common program types included medical ethics, community engagement, reflective practice, and professionalism, often delivered through interactive methods such as discussion, debates, and group activities. Assessments relied exclusively on self-reported surveys and ref lective writing. Overall, programs demonstrated short-term improvements in empathy, professionalism, and ethical reasoning, which were classified as Kirkpatrick Level 2 outcomes. No study provided evidence of Level 3 behavioral change. These findings reflect progress in Korean medical humanities programs while emphasizing the ongoing need for outcome-based evaluation and broader curricular development. This review provides a foundation for designing strengthened medical humanities programs, broadening curricular scope, and developing assessment strategies that better capture how humanities education contributes to students’ professional growth within the rapidly evolving landscape of Korean healthcare.

As holistic care gains prominence in nursing, spiritual care has emerged as a core dimension of patient-centered practice. However, undergraduate nursing curricula in South Korea have not sufficiently incorporated spiritual care education. This study examined nursing students’ perceptions, experiences, and educational needs regarding spiritual care using a mixed-methods approach. A total of 254 junior and senior nursing students completed an online survey assessing their educational experiences, perceived necessity of spiritual care, and levels of understanding and practice. To complement these findings, in-depth semi-structured interviews were conducted with seven students from a Christian nursing college. Quantitative data were analyzed using frequency analysis, the t-test, the chi-square test, and Pearson correlation coefficients, whereas qualitative data were thematically analyzed based on Giorgi’s phenomenological method. Results showed that more than half of participants had never received formal education on spiritual care, yet most recognized its importance and expressed strong preferences for required coursework and experiential learning. Students perceived spiritual care not solely as religious or end-of-life support but as empathetic, emotionally attuned care applicable across diverse clinical settings. Integration of structured and experiential approaches, such as role-play and simulation, was consistently emphasized. These findings highlight a significant gap between current curricula and clinical expectations, underscoring the urgent need for systematic integration of spiritual care education to strengthen holistic and patient-centered nursing competencies.

Academic disruptions, including pandemics and policy-related interruptions, pose a critical yet understudied threat to students’ psychological well-being and professional development. In South Korea, the physician–government dispute from February 2024 to August 2025 resulted in a sustained and unprecedented interruption of the medical curriculum. This systematic review was conducted to assess the psychosocial effects of academic disruption on medical students. We reviewed studies published from 2013 through July 2025 by systematically searching PubMed (MEDLINE), CINAHL (EBSCOhost), KoreaMed, RISS, and the National Assembly Library. Two reviewers independently screened and extracted data from 33 eligible studies. Psychological outcomes were categorized using a modified Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System framework to capture multidimensional impacts. Most studies documented consistent and substantial increases in anxiety (23%–84%) and depression (10%–65%) when clinical education and assessments were canceled or moved online. Beyond affective symptoms, qualitative synthesis revealed that the loss of authentic bedside learning and peer interaction weakened professional identity formation and diminished educational meaning. Although limited longitudinal findings suggested potential for post-traumatic growth, immediate effects were characterized by structural frustration and existential doubt. These results indicate that academic disruption generates a complex psychological crisis requiring multi-tiered institutional responses. Consequently, medical educators must prioritize strategies that preserve clinical exposure and social connectedness to safeguard the mental health and professional development of future physicians during periods of educational instability.

Background: Bronchiectasis is a chronic respiratory condition characterised by abnormal bronchial dilation, often accompanied by inflammation and infection. Tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF α) has been implicated in inflammatory processes, and its role in bronchiectasis severity remains underexplored. This study aimed to assess the correlation between serum TNF α levels and bronchiectasis severity using established scoring systems. Methods: A cross-sectional study was conducted among 96 patients diagnosed with bronchiectasis. Serum TNF α levels were measured and analysed in relation to clinical parameters, radiological features, and severity scores such as FACED and Bronchiectasis Severity Index (BSI). Statistical tests including the Mann–Whitney U -test and Kruskal–Wallis test were used to identify significant associations. Results: Elevated serum TNF α levels were significantly associated with fever, leukocytosis, recent hospital admissions, and bronchiectasis exacerbations. Patients with multi-lobar involvement and bilateral lung disease exhibited significantly higher TNF α levels ( P = 0.01). Pseudomonas colonisation was linked to increased TNF α levels. Severity scoring demonstrated a strong association with TNF α levels, with higher values seen in patients categorised as moderate or severe by FACED and BSI scores. Conclusion: Serum TNF α levels are a potential biomarker for assessing bronchiectasis severity. Elevated TNF α levels were notably linked to exacerbations, microbial colonisation, and severe disease presentations, underscoring its clinical relevance in guiding prognosis and management strategies.

Both acute and community care settings increasingly emphasize addressing complex client needs through interprofessional approaches, highlighting the necessity of preparing nursing graduates with competencies in collaboration, communication, and patient-centered holistic care. This study investigated the current status of interprofessional education (IPE) in nursing schools and assessed nursing students’ needs through a literature review and a descriptive survey of 200 undergraduate nursing students in South Korea. While IPE is actively implemented in North America—where it comprises approximately 84% of programs across disciplines such as nursing, medicine, physical therapy, pharmacy, social work, dentistry, and nutrition—its implementation remains less widespread in South Korea. Nevertheless, evidence from students indicates substantial educational benefits. Among participants, 6.0% had prior IPE experience, whereas 79.0% considered it necessary in the nursing curriculum. The most frequently identified optimal timing for IPE implementation was the third or fourth undergraduate year. Preferred courses for integration included Health Communication, Simulation, and Medical Ethics. Barriers to adoption were primarily educational overload and limited collaborative practice experience. Medicine, pharmacy, paramedicine, and psychology were the disciplines most preferred for joint participation. The mean readiness score for IPE was 75.3, with the highest ratings for teamwork and collaboration, followed by professional identity and roles/responsibilities. Female students demonstrated higher readiness for IPE than male students, and readiness tended to increase with age. Students with prior IPE experience also showed greater awareness of interprofessional education. These findings underscore the urgent need to integrate structured IPE into nursing curricula in South Korea to foster the collaborative competencies essential for high-quality, patient-centered care.

ABSTRACT Effective pain management in prehospital settings remains a significant challenge, particularly for patients with acute trauma. This report examines the complexities of conducting prehospital pain studies, focusing on two clinical trials as case studies. The first trial implemented a novel two‐step informed consent process, which, despite its innovation, faced logistical challenges and introduced biases favoring the enrollment of less severely injured patients. The second study, conducted under the federal regulatory pathway for Exception from Informed Consent (EFIC), successfully addressed consent challenges but restricted enrollment to severely injured patients to meet EFIC regulatory requirements. Both studies excluded women of childbearing age due to concerns about fetal safety. These limitations underscore the urgent need for regulatory revisions to expand research with alteration of informed consent, enabling the development of new interventions for prehospital pain management.

This qualitative study examined the teamwork development process among graduate students participating in the International Development Cooperation Expert Training Program at Seoul National University’s Department of Human Systems Medicine. The three-semester program comprised theoretical coursework, mixed methods research, and a field practicum in Cambodia. The curriculum was deliberately structured with progressively increasing levels of difficulty across semesters. Ten participants, including a professor, a teaching assistant, and graduate students from various disciplines, were recruited. Data were collected through semi-structured interviews and analyzed using thematic analysis. The teamwork development process emerged as a five-phase sequence: team building, adjustment, rule setting, implementation, and adaptation. The initial phase involved overcoming unfamiliarity through task-oriented collaboration. The adjustment phase centered on negotiating role conf licts and task-related conf licts. During the rule setting phase, psychological safety was crucial, enabling members to acknowledge knowledge gaps without fear of judgment. This phase also included the establishment of communication norms and stabilization of leadership. Implementation was marked by efficient role allocation based on expertise and creative problem-solving. In the adaptation phase, teams adjusted rapidly to field conditions, embraced f lexible role execution, and strengthened trust through active knowledge exchange. The findings highlight that trust-based psychological safety, clear role definition, conflict mediation, autonomous collaboration, and adaptability are central to effective teamwork in medical education. The study underscores the need for structured, process-oriented approaches in teamwork education for global medical contexts that cultivate psychological safety, incorporate gradually increasing difficulty, and require sufficient time investment.

<b>Introduction:</b> Many pregnancy-related deaths can be avoided if health care workers reliably provide prompt, evidence-based care during the final stages of pregnancy and delivery. We report the impact on the institutional maternal mortality ratio (iMMR) of a quality improvement (QI) initiative that focused on establishing timely and reliable obstetric care in public Brazilian hospitals for the primary causes of maternal deaths.<b>Methods:</b> The QI initiative used a quasi-experimental time-series design implemented in 19 Brazilian maternity hospitals comparing 3 periods: baseline (January 2018 to November 2019), implementation (December 2019 to March 2021), and post-implementation (April 2021 to September 2021). We used a sequential approach, referred to as the "4Rs" (Recognize, Rescue, Reassess, and Refer), with the Modified Early Obstetric Warning Score (MEOWS) as a key tool, to identify clinical deterioration and implement care bundles directed at the management of 3 principal life-threatening conditions around the time of birth: postpartum hemorrhage, sepsis, and hypertensive disorders of pregnancy (HDPs). Clinical staff received tailored training and support within a structured learning system that brought multiple teams together to rapidly test and implement evidence-based changes.<b>Results:</b> Comparing the baseline with the implementation period, run charts detected an overall reduction of 34.2% in all causes of maternal deaths (from 83.7 to 55 deaths per 100,000 live births). Additionally, the iMMR due to the 3 analyzed life-threatening conditions decreased by 60.9% between baseline and the combined implementation and post-implementation periods (from 44.1 to 17.2 deaths per 100,000 live births); postpartum hemorrhage-related deaths were reduced by 72.9% (from 11.7 to 3.17 deaths per 100,000 live births) and sepsis-related deaths were reduced by 100% (from 20.4 to 0 deaths per 100,000 liv births). No changes by HDP-related deaths were observed. There was a 178% increase in iMMR by all causes (mainly attributed to COVID-19) during the post-implementation period, but deaths related to life-threatening conditions either remained stable or decreased even further.<b>Conclusion:</b> Optimization of the steps in a care sequence and reliable implementation of care bundles directed at the principal life-threatening conditions around the time of birth, using QI, tailored training, and the MEOWS tool, seem to be feasible and promising approaches for reducing iMMR.

In response to the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic, a nongovernmental organization in Nepal piloted a maternal and newborn health helpline program in partnership with the Government of Nepal and the Nepal Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. The program connected service providers in remote areas with real-time clinical support during obstetric and neonatal emergencies via telephone consultations with clinical experts. 551 primary health care facilities across 14 districts of Nepal were included in the program and connected to a roster of 33 clinical expert volunteers from district or tertiary care hospitals. To assess the results of the program, we collected both quantitative and qualitative data, including monthly health facility record reviews from July 2020 to June 2021 and semi-structured interviews with clinical experts and service providers conducted in June 2021. Of the 551 health facilities included in the program, 160 facilities (29%) reported using the helpline during the study period, with 429 teleconsultation cases recorded. We found that 21% of these cases that otherwise would have been referred to a hospital were effectively managed by telephone on-site at rural health facilities, revealing the promising potential for impact using a low-tech solution. Of the health facilities that participated in the program, the helpline was predominantly used in remote facilities where access to higher-level referral centers for emergencies was limited. Feedback from both experts and service providers revealed that the program helped to improve clinical decision-making during emergencies, build confidence and skills of service providers, and improve referral efficiency. Implementation challenges included service providers' underreporting of helpline utilization, a lack of essential drugs at primary health care facilities, unreliable phone signals, and a lack of financial incentives for clinical experts. The results and implementation experiences shared in this article provide a template for the design and implementation of similar support programs for service providers managing clinical emergencies in rural contexts.

O presente texto tem por objeto analisar as ações educativas do Instituto de pesquisa e Memória Pretos novos (IPN), na Pequena África, na Zona Portuária do Rio de Janeiro, como mecanismo de luta antirracista e ressignificação da memória. Temcomo ponto de partida o sítio arqueológico do Cemitério dos Pretos Novos que guarda uma memória traumática da dor e do horror do passado escravista. Pretende-se analisar como, por meiode uma pedagogia da reparação,o IPN transforma uma história de morte em uma história de vida e superação.

ABSTRACT Objective: Objective of the study was to determine the frequency, site and pattern of common soft tissue injuries in the maxillofacial region among patients presenting to the trauma centre and maxillofacial OPD in Ayub Teaching Hospital Abbottabad (ATH ATD) and to determine the results based on the presence or absence of helmet use. Methods: A cross-sectional study was done at the trauma centre and Maxillofacial OPD in ATH Abbottabad, Pakistan, from 15th August 2024 to 15th June 2025.A total of 126 participants were included in the study. Data was collected using a questionnaire. Frequency, site and pattern of common soft tissue injuries were assessed in motorcyclists with or without helmet use. Data was analyzed using SPSS 27. Results: Total sample size was 126. Fall 78(61.9%) was most common cause of injury to maxillofacial soft tissues followed by RTA 31(24. 6%).Out of total of 20(15.9%)motorcyclists with RTA included in study, none of them were wearing helmet. Forehead 31(24.6%) was most common site of soft tissue injury. Extra oral laceration 85(67.5%) was most common type of soft tissue injury in maxillofacial region. Conclusions: Injuries to the maxillofacial region are common findings, with falls being the most common cause, the forehead as a common site and extraoral laceration being a common pattern for soft tissue injuries of the maxillofacial region in patients presenting to ATH, ATD. Key words: Facial Injuries, Accidental Falls, Lacerations, forehead, Accidents; Traffic, helmet.

ABSTRACT OBJECTIVES This study aimed to evaluate the coincidence and displacement of the gingival zenith in relation to the VBM of maxillary anterior teeth and to examine possible gender differences. METHODOLOGY A cross-sectional study was conducted with a non-probability consecutive sampling technique on 100 patients aged 18-30 at the outpatient department of Rehman College of Dentistry. Maxillary impressions were taken and poured in type IV dental stone. A digital caliper measured the gingival zenith and VBM on the casts, along with a pico-coronal displacement of lateral incisors. Data were analyzed using SPSS v22 with appropriate statistical tests (Shapiro-Wilk, t-test/Mann-Whitney U, chi-square), with significance set at p &lt; 0.05. RESULTSWith mean shifts of 0.70-0.84 mm and no significant gender differences (parametric effect size d = 0.25-0.35; 95% CI; p&gt;0.05), gingival zenith displacement was more prevalent in central incisors (&gt;90%). Minor nonparametric effects were observed in canines and lateral incisors (r &lt; 0.081), with canines most aligned with VBM. CONCLUSION Displacement of the gingival zenith is common in maxillary anterior teeth, particularly in central incisors, while canines show the greatest likelihood of coincidence with the VBM. Gender did not influence gingival zenith position. Careful assessment of zenith position is recommended when planning esthetic dental treatments.

Abstract: Alport syndrome is a disorder affecting basement membranes in the glomeruli, cochlea, and eyes due to mutations in collagen IV genes (COL4A3, COL4A4, COL4A5). It exhibits genetic and phenotypic variability and can be inherited via X-linked, autosomal recessive, or autosomal dominant patterns. Those with Alport syndrome face a considerable risk of kidney failure along with potential sensorineural hearing loss and eye abnormalities. Early diagnosis is vital due to the availability of effective interventions for kidney disease related to Alport syndrome. We are presenting case report of patient, 08 years old boy who presented as nephrotic syndrome and ultimately diagnosed as case of chronic kidney disease due to Alport syndrome. Early diagnosis of Alport syndrome can be challenging because of the disorder's genotypic and phenotypic complexity. Regular follow and vigilant monitoring along with clinical examination and workup can lead to exact diagnosis. Key words: Alport syndrome, collagen type IV genes, COL4A5, X-linked, sensorineural hearing loss, nephrotic syndrome.

Nowadays, the notion of emergence and development is in vogue.In almost all domains of life, humanity is striving to emerge or improve upon existing living conditions.Some States which are lagging behind in the realm of emergence and development are endeavouring to breach the gap between them and the developed States.Conversely, some States are behaving as if retrogression is the order of the day in their daily activities.This is obviously the case with African States.It is in this light that I feel that there should be a radical or revolutionary approach to the notion of emergence and development in these States.This radical or revolutionary approach is a pragmatic or practical journey to a genuine unity and solidarity within the framework of a powerful federal republic involving all existing African States.The said pragmatic move basically involves almost all the social units and activities of the society, namely, the family, peer groups, educational institutions, religious institutions, socio-cultural groups, political parties, non-governmental organizations, inter-governmental organizations, sporting groups, musical activities, etc.In a nutshell, for Africa to unite concretely, there must be a massive mobilization at this grassroots level within these institutions and activities.

Journal of Oral Research, is devoted to the dissemination of knowledge in oral and craniofacial sciences, including: oral surgery and medicine and rehabilitation, craniofacial surgery, dentistry, orofacial pain and motor disorders, head and neck surgery, s

Deep Learning (DL) has undergone widespread adoption for medical image analysis and diagnosis. Numerous studies have explored mammographic image analysis for breast cancer screening. For this study, we assessed the hypothesis that stratifying mammography images based on the presence or absence of a corresponding region of interest (ROI) improves classification accuracy for both normal–abnormal and benign–malignant classifications. Our methodology involves independently training models and performing predictions on each subgroup with subsequent integration of the results. We used several DL models, including ResNet, EfficientNet, SwinTransformer, ConvNeXt, and MobileNet. For experimentation, we used the publicly available VinDr., CDD-CESM, and DMID datasets. Our comparison with prediction results obtained without ROI-based stratification demonstrated that the utility of considering ROI presence to enhance diagnostic accuracy in mammography increases along with the data volume. These findings support the usefulness of our stratification approach, particularly as a dataset size grows.

The fifteenth issue of e-Letras com Vida — Journal of Global Studies: Humanities, Sciences and Arts brings together a set of voices and perspectives which, emerging from diverse geographic and epistemological territories, converge around a shared concern: how does the human being — individually and collectively — transform when challenged to reread their own life and their own time? Which movements — inner, social, historical — shape that transformation? In this issue, the journal reaffirms its mission: to foster an interdisciplinary dialogue that builds a bridge between time, space and the production of knowledge, calling upon the Humanities, the Sciences and the Arts to reflect on what moves us and what transforms us.

The main aim of the present study was to find the impact of Teachers’ attitude towards Academic supervision on Organizational Citizenship ‎Behavior among secondary school teachers. The survey was conducted on N-=1199 secondary school teachers of Haryana state of India. ‎Teachers’ Attitude towards Academic supervision scale [1] was used to assess the attitude of teachers towards academic supervision and ‎Organisational Citizenship Behaviour [2] was used to assess the Organisational Citizenship Behaviour among the secondary school teach-‎ers. The scales were validated on the Indian population of secondary school teachers. The results confirmed that both scales were valid and ‎reliable to be used on Indian population of secondary school teachers. Further, the results ascertained that a significant portion of teachers ‎‎(32.86%) showed attitude towards academic supervision and a substantial percentage of the teachers showed moderate (49.62%) or high ‎‎(28.44%) levels of organisational Citizenship Behaviour (OCB). Furthermore, male and female; rural and urban areas, government and ‎private secondary school teachers and teachers with different years of teaching experience do not differ significantly with respect to their ‎attitude of towards academic supervision and male/female, rural/urban and government/private secondary school teachers did not differ significantly with respect to their organisational citizenship behaviour, but a significant difference was found among the teachers with different ‎years of teaching experiences. Furthermore, the results indicated that teachers’ attitude towards academic supervision is not only statistically ‎significant but also has a meaningful impact on the Organizational Citizenship Behaviour of the secondary school teachers‎.

Pneumocystis jirovecii (PJ) immünosupresif hastalarda pnömoniye sebep olan fırsatçı bir maya benzeri fungustur. En riskli grup HIV-pozitif hastalardır ancak son yıllarda HIV-negatif immünosuprese hastalarda daha sık görülmektedir. Bu çalışmada Marmara Üniversitesi Pendik Eğitim ve Araştırma Hastanesinde Pneumocystis jirovecii pnömonisi (PJP) ve diğer fırsatçı solunum yolu patojenleri şüphesi ile bronkoskopik örnekleri değerlendirilen hastalarda PJ polimeraz zincir reaksiyonu (PZR) pozitiflik oranı, hasta risk faktörleri, klinik ve laboratuvar bulgularını retrospektif olarak değerlendirilmiştir. Toplam 133 hastanın bronkoalveolar lavaj örneğinden PJ-PZR çalışılmış ve % 13 (17/133) oranında pozitiflik bulunmuştur. PZR pozitif hastaların % 41’inin HIV-pozitif ve % 59’unun HIV-negatif immünosuprese hastalar olduğu görülmüştür. Örnek gönderilen hastaların 72’sine ampirik trimetroprim/sülfametoksazol başlanmış, PZR pozitif hastalarla beraber toplam 38 hastada tedaviye devam edilmiştir. PJ-PZR negatif 21 hastanın dokuzunda klinik yanıt alınmıştır ve başka bir enfeksiyon etkeni gösterilememiştir. Toplam 66 hastaya hipoksik olmaları nedeniyle steroid verilmiştir. Ampirik tedavi baş- lanan hastaların % 24’ünde PJ-PZR pozitifliği ve % 36’sının tedaviye yanıt verdiği görülmüştür. HIV-negatif immün suprese hastalarda PJP akla gelmeli ve gerekli örnek alındıktan ve ampirik tedaviye başlandıktan sonra başka bir etken gösterilemiyorsa ve yüksek klinik şüphe varsa tedaviye devam edilebilir.

Introducción. Los procesos discapacitantes (PD) son cambios que producen restricciones o limitaciones en una estructura o función corporal (auditiva, visual o motriz), sin que ésta se pierda por completo, cuando se presentan en niños pueden dificultarles su desarrollo social y académico. Objetivo. Identificar la diferencia en la prevalencia de procesos discapacitantes en niños con y sin discapacidad cuando se obtiene la información con métodos directos (MD) e indirectos (MI). Metodología. Estudio cuantitativo, transversal y comparativo entre niños de una escuela primaria regular y un Centro de Atención Múltiple (CAM) de la capital del estado de San Luis Potosí. La identificación se realizó mediante evaluaciones físicas directas de los niños y la aplicación del cuestionario Washington a los padres. Resultados. Se evaluaron niños de entre 6 y 12 años, en la escuela primaria regular fueron 195 niños y en el CAM 39. Del total de niños 53% fueron hombres y 47% mujeres. El principal proceso discapacitante identificado con MD en niños con discapacidad fueron alteraciones motrices (59%) y en niños sin discapacidad fueron las alteraciones visuales (23%). Con el MI se identificaron alteraciones motrices en el 51% de niños con discapacidad y alteraciones visuales en el 28% de niños sin discapacidad. La fuerza de concordancia entre ambos métodos fue leve en áreas visual y auditiva y aceptable en motriz. Solo la motriz fue estadísticamente significativa. Conclusiones. Los niños con discapacidad presentaron más alteraciones sensoriomotoras. Las prevalencias de PD fueron mayores cuando se utilizó el MD en ambas poblaciones y fue superior en el área motriz en ambos grupos.

This dataset encompasses Xenium data from cortical tissue of six human AD donors, three homozygous for APOE3 and three homozygous for APOE4. After Xenium, the same sections were stained for amyloid beta plaques with methoxy-X04. The raw and processed data from Xenium as well as the full-slide scans from methoxy-X04 and SYTOX Green staining are shared here. This data is associated with "An Exhausted-Like Microglial Population that Accumulates in Aged and APOE4 Genotype Alzheimer’s Brains", from Millet, Ledo et al..

Communicable diseases such as tuberculosis (TB/TBC) and non-communicable diseases such as diabetes mellitus (DM) represent a double burden in public health that requires an integrated approach. At Lepo-Lepo Public Health Center, TB cases fluctuate annually, while DM cases have increased significantly each year. This study aims to analyze the factors influencing the risk of diabetes mellitus among pulmonary tuberculosis patients in the working area of Lepo-Lepo Public Health Center, Kendari City, in 2025. This research employed a quantitative observational analytic method with a case-control design. The study population consisted of all patients recorded at BLUD UPTD Lepo-Lepo Public Health Center from January to September 2025. A total sample of 90 respondents was selected, comprising 30 cases and 60 controls, using total sampling for the case group and simple random sampling for the control group. Data collection was conducted using a structured questionnaire. The findings indicate that age significantly influences the incidence of DM among pulmonary TB patients (p = 0.000 < 0.05; OR = 19.421). Sex also shows a significant effect (p = 0.040 < 0.05; OR = 2.822), as do smoking behavior (p = 0.000 < 0.05; OR = 7.667), nutritional status (p = 0.020 < 0.05; OR = 3.208), history of diabetes (p = 0.044 < 0.05; OR = 2.852), and health literacy (p = 0.008 < 0.05; OR = 3.727). Among all variables, age is the most influential factor associated with DM incidence in pulmonary TB patients (p = 0.000 < 0.05; Wald = 14.611). In conclusion, age, sex, smoking behavior, nutritional status, history of diabetes, and health literacy all have significant effects on the incidence of diabetes mellitus among pulmonary tuberculosis patients. It is recommended that pulmonary TB and DM patients adhere to medication, maintain a healthy diet, routinely monitor blood glucose levels, avoid smoking, and consult healthcare professionals to obtain accurate health information related to pulmonary TB and diabetes mellitus.

Supernumerary breast tissue is a rare congenital anomaly that typically arises along the "milk line," which extends from the armpit to the groin. Though often benign, supernumerary breasts can be a site for malignancy, including invasive breast carcinoma. This case report describes the diagnosis and management of a patient who developed invasive breast carcinoma in her supernumerary axillary breast tissue, highlighting the importance of early detection and thorough investigation of any breast-related abnormalities, even in accessory tissue.

A dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumor (DNET) is a low-grade, slow-growing brain tumor. It is a glioneuronal tumor, which means it contains properties of both glial and neuronal cells. DNETs can manifest as seizures that may be drug-resistant. The initial diagnosis is made by MRI or the radiological appearance is often suggestive. In this work we report the case of a patient in whom the DNET type tumor was revealed by convulsive seizures.

Paget's disease of the nipple (PDN) is a rare and often misdiagnosed condition characterized by the infiltration of adenocarcinoma cells into the nipple epidermis. It poses substantial diagnostic and therapeutic challenges due to its similarity to benign dermatological conditions and its association with in situ or invasive carcinoma. This case study presents a rare and clinically challenging instance of occult breast cancer associated with Paget's disease of the nipple. Occult breast cancers are often not detectable through standard imaging methods, such as mammograms or ultrasounds, and may only be identified after symptoms appear or through more invasive diagnostic techniques. Paget’s disease, a form of breast cancer that affects the skin of the nipple and areola, can be particularly difficult to diagnose early, as its symptoms—such as itching, redness, or discharge—can often mimic benign dermatological conditions. In many cases, Paget’s disease is associated with an underlying invasive breast cancer that is not immediately apparent, making early detection and intervention critical. This case highlights the diagnostic journey of a patient presenting with atypical nipple symptoms, ultimately revealing an occult breast cancer linked to Paget’s disease. Through this case, we aim to emphasize the importance of a thorough clinical evaluation and multi-disciplinary approach to diagnosis, as well as the significance of early recognition in improving patient outcomes.

Background: In Dimong Village, Madiun Regency, East Java, Indonesia, showed a hypertension prevalence of 40%, higher than the national. Passive smoking is a risk factor for hypertension, and 41.7% suffer from hypertension. However, sometimes passive smokers have lower resting blood pressure. What is the relationship between passive smoking status and the incidence of hypertension? This study aims to determine the relationship between the two. Methods: This cross-sectional study was conducted in Dimong Village. A total of 94 individuals aged 18 years and over were selected as respondents using simple random sampling and met the sample criteria. The study variables consisted of passive smoking and hypertension. In addition to blood pressure measurements using a digital sphygmomanometer, respondents were also interviewed to determine whether their status as passive smokers was related to their hypertension using a questionnaire. The data obtained were then analyzed using a chi-square test to determine the relationship between the two variables. Results: The incidence of passive smoking remains high (81.91%), particularly among those aged 61-70, women, those with low levels of education, and those who are unemployed (housewives). Similarly, the incidence of hypertension remains high (52.12%), with similar characteristics, but is more prevalent among those who have graduated from high school or its equivalent. The probability value of the association between passive smoking and hypertension is 0.162. Conclusion: Passive smoking is not associated with hypertension. Similar research is needed, taking into account the distribution of passive smoking and the more varied incidence of hypertension.

Paget's disease of the nipple (PDN) is a rare and often misdiagnosed condition characterized by the infiltration of adenocarcinoma cells into the nipple epidermis. It poses substantial diagnostic and therapeutic challenges due to its similarity to benign dermatological conditions and its association with in situ or invasive carcinoma. This case study presents a rare and clinically challenging instance of occult breast cancer associated with Paget's disease of the nipple. Occult breast cancers are often not detectable through standard imaging methods, such as mammograms or ultrasounds, and may only be identified after symptoms appear or through more invasive diagnostic techniques. Paget’s disease, a form of breast cancer that affects the skin of the nipple and areola, can be particularly difficult to diagnose early, as its symptoms—such as itching, redness, or discharge—can often mimic benign dermatological conditions. In many cases, Paget’s disease is associated with an underlying invasive breast cancer that is not immediately apparent, making early detection and intervention critical. This case highlights the diagnostic journey of a patient presenting with atypical nipple symptoms, ultimately revealing an occult breast cancer linked to Paget’s disease. Through this case, we aim to emphasize the importance of a thorough clinical evaluation and multi-disciplinary approach to diagnosis, as well as the significance of early recognition in improving patient outcomes.

Interleukin-9, or IL-9, plays a role in allergic inflammation, autoimmunity, and tumor immunity. Despite its biological relevance, measuring IL-9 in human serum is hard. The levels are usually low, and most standard protein detection techniques are not sensitive enough to detect it. This study aimed to determine the detection threshold of IL-9 using chemiluminescent Western blotting and evaluate its applicability for measuring endogenous IL-9 levels in serum samples from healthy individuals. We performed serial dilutions of recombinant IL-9 from 20 ng to 0.01 ng and analyzed them alongside serum samples (S15, S10, S5) from healthy volunteers by Western blotting. Signal intensity for each was assessed by subtracting the background signal to determine the detection limits. Membrane stripping, three-layer antibody amplification, immunoprecipitation, and prolonged exposure were trialed to enhance sensitivity as part of an optimization approach. IL-9 was effectively detected at concentrations ≥5 ng, with signal intensity dropping nattily below this threshold. Serum samples showed a negligible signal, implying that endogenous IL-9 concentrations in healthy individuals fell below the assay’s detection limit. Also, signal enhancement strategies failed to improve detection at lower concentrations. Western blotting is suitable for confirming the presence of IL-9 at nanogram levels but is insufficient for detecting physiological concentrations in serum. These findings underscore the need for more sensitive platforms, such as ELISA or digital immunoassays, to accurately quantify low-abundance cytokines, such as IL-9, in clinical samples.

Body image defined as an individual's perception, thoughts, and feelings about their physical appearance, is significantly shaped during adolescence by peers, family, romantic partners, and social media influencers. This study aimed to analyze the association between body image and macronutrient intake among female adolescents. A cross-sectional study was conducted with 116 female students aged 16-19 at SMA Lab School in Surabaya. Body image was assessed using the Body Shape Questionnaire (BSQ-34), and dietary intake was estimated using two non-consecutive 24-hour recalls calculating energy and macronutrient consumption. Although 59.3% of participants had a positive body image, the majority had inadequate energy and macronutrient intake. Inadequate consumption was prevalent across both body image groups. A significant association was found between body image and energy intake (p=0.029), as well as fat intake (p=0.001). This study establishes a significant association between body image and specific dietary components in adolescent girls. The findings highlight the critical need for health interventions that simultaneously promote balanced nutrition and a positive body image.

Introduction: Congenital anomalies of the carpus are rare, and scaphoid agenesis is an exceptionally uncommon condition. Most reported cases involve unilateral absence and are frequently associated with other malformations such as thumb hypoplasia or radial hemimelia. No previous reports have described isolated bilateral agenesis of the proximal pole of the scaphoid. Materials and Methods: We present the case of a 32-year-old male evaluated for intermittent right-wrist pain. Clinical examination was complemented with bilateral wrist radiographs, computed tomography, and magnetic resonance imaging to characterize carpal anatomy and exclude associated abnormalities. Results: Imaging revealed bilateral congenital agenesis of the proximal pole of the scaphoid with preservation of the distal portion. No additional skeletal, systemic, or soft-tissue anomalies were identified. The patient had no significant medical or family history of congenital disorders. Physical examination demonstrated normal wrist alignment, full range of motion, and no functional limitations. Because symptoms were mild and the wrist remained stable, conservative management with periodic follow-up was recommended. Discussion: This appears to be the first documented case of isolated bilateral congenital agenesis of the proximal pole of the scaphoid. The patient’s benign clinical course supports a non-interventional approach. Recognition of this rare variant is crucial to avoid misdiagnosis, particularly confusion with post-traumatic conditions. Conclusion: Isolated bilateral congenital agenesis of the proximal pole of the scaphoid represents a previously undescribed anatomical variant. Awareness of this condition may prevent unnecessary interventions and contributes to understanding congenital carpal anomalies.

Hypertension is a chronic condition characterized by a persistent elevation in blood pressure. It is classified as a non-communicable disease. Various health services are provided to ensure patient satisfaction. The objective of this study is to analyze the factors associated with the satisfaction of patients with hypertension in Integrated Guidance Post for Non-Communicable Diseases (Posbindu PTM) within the working area of the Lepo-Lepo Community Health Center, Kendari City, in 2025. This study employs a quantitative design with a cross-sectional approach and uses accidental sampling as the sampling technique. The study population consists of 98 hypertensive patients who accessed services at the Posbindu PTM. The research instrument used is a questionnaire. The study variables include tangibles, reliability, responsiveness, assurance, empathy, and trust. Data analysis comprises univariate and bivariate analyses using the chi-square test, as well as multivariate analysis using binary logistic regression.The chi-square test results indicate significant associations between patient satisfaction and the variables of tangibles (p=0.003), reliability (p=0.023), responsiveness (p=0.03), assurance (p=0.016), empathy (p=0.001), and trust (p=0.03) in obtaining services at the Posbindu PTM. The binary logistic regression test shows that empathy is the most influential variable, with an Exp(B) value of 8.656. This study demonstrates that the higher the level of empathetic health services provided by the community health center, the greater the satisfaction experienced by hypertensive patients.

Body image defined as an individual's perception, thoughts, and feelings about their physical appearance, is significantly shaped during adolescence by peers, family, romantic partners, and social media influencers. This study aimed to analyze the association between body image and macronutrient intake among female adolescents. A cross-sectional study was conducted with 116 female students aged 16-19 at SMA Lab School in Surabaya. Body image was assessed using the Body Shape Questionnaire (BSQ-34), and dietary intake was estimated using two non-consecutive 24-hour recalls calculating energy and macronutrient consumption. Although 59.3% of participants had a positive body image, the majority had inadequate energy and macronutrient intake. Inadequate consumption was prevalent across both body image groups. A significant association was found between body image and energy intake (p=0.029), as well as fat intake (p=0.001). This study establishes a significant association between body image and specific dietary components in adolescent girls. The findings highlight the critical need for health interventions that simultaneously promote balanced nutrition and a positive body image.

Supernumerary breast tissue is a rare congenital anomaly that typically arises along the "milk line," which extends from the armpit to the groin. Though often benign, supernumerary breasts can be a site for malignancy, including invasive breast carcinoma. This case report describes the diagnosis and management of a patient who developed invasive breast carcinoma in her supernumerary axillary breast tissue, highlighting the importance of early detection and thorough investigation of any breast-related abnormalities, even in accessory tissue.

A dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumor (DNET) is a low-grade, slow-growing brain tumor. It is a glioneuronal tumor, which means it contains properties of both glial and neuronal cells. DNETs can manifest as seizures that may be drug-resistant. The initial diagnosis is made by MRI or the radiological appearance is often suggestive. In this work we report the case of a patient in whom the DNET type tumor was revealed by convulsive seizures.

Hypertension is a chronic condition characterized by a persistent elevation in blood pressure. It is classified as a non-communicable disease. Various health services are provided to ensure patient satisfaction. The objective of this study is to analyze the factors associated with the satisfaction of patients with hypertension in Integrated Guidance Post for Non-Communicable Diseases (Posbindu PTM) within the working area of the Lepo-Lepo Community Health Center, Kendari City, in 2025. This study employs a quantitative design with a cross-sectional approach and uses accidental sampling as the sampling technique. The study population consists of 98 hypertensive patients who accessed services at the Posbindu PTM. The research instrument used is a questionnaire. The study variables include tangibles, reliability, responsiveness, assurance, empathy, and trust. Data analysis comprises univariate and bivariate analyses using the chi-square test, as well as multivariate analysis using binary logistic regression.The chi-square test results indicate significant associations between patient satisfaction and the variables of tangibles (p=0.003), reliability (p=0.023), responsiveness (p=0.03), assurance (p=0.016), empathy (p=0.001), and trust (p=0.03) in obtaining services at the Posbindu PTM. The binary logistic regression test shows that empathy is the most influential variable, with an Exp(B) value of 8.656. This study demonstrates that the higher the level of empathetic health services provided by the community health center, the greater the satisfaction experienced by hypertensive patients.

This study is to analyse the correlation between the lateral ala nasi point and the midpoint of the maxillary canine. This observational study employed a cross-sectional design with 60 samples aged 20-39 years from the Faculty of Dental Medicine, Universitas Airlangga, selected using purposive sampling based on inclusion criteria. Interalare distance and inter-canine distance were measured using digital callipers with 0.01 mm precision. Data analysis was conducted using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov normality test, Levene's homogeneity test, and Spearman rank correlation test with significance level set at p < 0.05. The mean inter-alare distance was 38.03 ± 2.97 mm (range: 31.00-47.10 mm), whilst the mean inter-canine distance was 37.43 ± 2.36 mm (range: 33.70-48.37 mm). Spearman correlation analysis revealed a statistically significant positive correlation between the lateral ala nasi point and the midpoint of the maxillary canine (ρ = 0.570, p < 0.001). The correlation remained significant despite the multi-ethnic composition of the study population, which included 48.3% Javanese participants and 16 different ethnic backgrounds. There is a moderate positive correlation between the lateral ala nasi point and the midpoint of the maxillary canine in the multi-ethnic Indonesian young adult population at Universitas Airlangga.

Stunting is a condition of growth retardation that occurs in the first 1,000 days of life. The child's early life is next. Most instances of failure to grow occur in the first two years of life. Stunting in childhood is one of the most significant obstacles to human development. The purpose of this study is to analyze factors related to the incidence of stunting in toddlers (12-59 months) in the working area of the Langara Health Center, Konawe Islands Regency in 2025. This type of research is a quantitative research with a case control approach and simple random sampling techniques. The population of this study is 116 respondents in this study. The research instrument is a questionnaire sheet. The variables of this study are Infectious Diseases, Basic Immunization, Parenting. Data analysis used univariate, bivariate analysis with chi-square and multivariate tests using binary logistic regression. The results of the study showed that there was a relationship between infectious diseases (0.000), basic immunization (0.000), and parenting (0.000) in the working area of the Langara health center, Konawe Islands Regency in 2025. The binary logistics regression test showed that the Infectious Disease Variable was the most influential variable on the incidence of stunting in the working area of the Langara Health Center, Konawe Regency, Islands in 2025 with an Exp(B) value of 31,130.

Mental health among adolescents in North Lombok, Indonesia, has become an urgent concern due to the high prevalence of psychological disorders following the 2018 earthquake. This community service program aimed to improve mental health literacy and screen psychological conditions among senior high school students through a structured educational seminar and training session. Forty students participated in the intervention, which included pre- and post-tests to evaluate knowledge gains, as well as completion of the Self-Reporting Questionnaire-29 (SRQ-29) to assess psychological conditions. The findings showed a significant increase in knowledge post-intervention (mean increase = 13.87 points, p < 0.05). SRQ-29 results revealed that 80.49% of respondents experienced depression/anxiety/stress, 70.73% showed psychotic symptoms, and 92.68% met the criteria for PTSD. Co-occurrence of multiple disorders was common, with 45% of students experiencing all three simultaneously. These figures significantly exceed national and international post-disaster mental health data. The program highlights the importance of school-based mental health initiatives, particularly in disaster-prone regions, and supports the use of early screening combined with psychoeducational efforts to mitigate long-term psychological effects in vulnerable youth populations.

Stunting is a condition of growth retardation that occurs in the first 1,000 days of life. The child's early life is next. Most instances of failure to grow occur in the first two years of life. Stunting in childhood is one of the most significant obstacles to human development. The purpose of this study is to analyze factors related to the incidence of stunting in toddlers (12-59 months) in the working area of the Langara Health Center, Konawe Islands Regency in 2025. This type of research is a quantitative research with a case control approach and simple random sampling techniques. The population of this study is 116 respondents in this study. The research instrument is a questionnaire sheet. The variables of this study are Infectious Diseases, Basic Immunization, Parenting. Data analysis used univariate, bivariate analysis with chi-square and multivariate tests using binary logistic regression. The results of the study showed that there was a relationship between infectious diseases (0.000), basic immunization (0.000), and parenting (0.000) in the working area of the Langara health center, Konawe Islands Regency in 2025. The binary logistics regression test showed that the Infectious Disease Variable was the most influential variable on the incidence of stunting in the working area of the Langara Health Center, Konawe Regency, Islands in 2025 with an Exp(B) value of 31,130.

Communicable diseases such as tuberculosis (TB/TBC) and non-communicable diseases such as diabetes mellitus (DM) represent a double burden in public health that requires an integrated approach. At Lepo-Lepo Public Health Center, TB cases fluctuate annually, while DM cases have increased significantly each year. This study aims to analyze the factors influencing the risk of diabetes mellitus among pulmonary tuberculosis patients in the working area of Lepo-Lepo Public Health Center, Kendari City, in 2025. This research employed a quantitative observational analytic method with a case-control design. The study population consisted of all patients recorded at BLUD UPTD Lepo-Lepo Public Health Center from January to September 2025. A total sample of 90 respondents was selected, comprising 30 cases and 60 controls, using total sampling for the case group and simple random sampling for the control group. Data collection was conducted using a structured questionnaire. The findings indicate that age significantly influences the incidence of DM among pulmonary TB patients (p = 0.000 < 0.05; OR = 19.421). Sex also shows a significant effect (p = 0.040 < 0.05; OR = 2.822), as do smoking behavior (p = 0.000 < 0.05; OR = 7.667), nutritional status (p = 0.020 < 0.05; OR = 3.208), history of diabetes (p = 0.044 < 0.05; OR = 2.852), and health literacy (p = 0.008 < 0.05; OR = 3.727). Among all variables, age is the most influential factor associated with DM incidence in pulmonary TB patients (p = 0.000 < 0.05; Wald = 14.611). In conclusion, age, sex, smoking behavior, nutritional status, history of diabetes, and health literacy all have significant effects on the incidence of diabetes mellitus among pulmonary tuberculosis patients. It is recommended that pulmonary TB and DM patients adhere to medication, maintain a healthy diet, routinely monitor blood glucose levels, avoid smoking, and consult healthcare professionals to obtain accurate health information related to pulmonary TB and diabetes mellitus.

This study is to analyse the correlation between the lateral ala nasi point and the midpoint of the maxillary canine. This observational study employed a cross-sectional design with 60 samples aged 20-39 years from the Faculty of Dental Medicine, Universitas Airlangga, selected using purposive sampling based on inclusion criteria. Interalare distance and inter-canine distance were measured using digital callipers with 0.01 mm precision. Data analysis was conducted using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov normality test, Levene's homogeneity test, and Spearman rank correlation test with significance level set at p < 0.05. The mean inter-alare distance was 38.03 ± 2.97 mm (range: 31.00-47.10 mm), whilst the mean inter-canine distance was 37.43 ± 2.36 mm (range: 33.70-48.37 mm). Spearman correlation analysis revealed a statistically significant positive correlation between the lateral ala nasi point and the midpoint of the maxillary canine (ρ = 0.570, p < 0.001). The correlation remained significant despite the multi-ethnic composition of the study population, which included 48.3% Javanese participants and 16 different ethnic backgrounds. There is a moderate positive correlation between the lateral ala nasi point and the midpoint of the maxillary canine in the multi-ethnic Indonesian young adult population at Universitas Airlangga.

Background: Bilateral breast cancer (BBC) with discordant immunohistochemical (IHC) profiles is uncommon but presents significant challenges in diagnosis and treatment. When tumors in each breast exhibit distinct receptor status—such as triple-negative in one and hormone receptor-positive or HER2-positive in the other—treatment decisions become complex. Methods: We retrospectively analyzed five patients diagnosed between 2020 and 2024 with synchronous bilateral breast cancer exhibiting discordant IHC profiles. Clinicopathological characteristics, treatment regimens, and outcomes were reviewed. Results: All five patients presented with distinct molecular subtypes between the two breasts. Combinations included triple-negative and luminal A, HER2-positive and luminal B, and other discordant patterns. All were managed with personalized treatment plans addressing each tumor's biology. Treatment included combinations of chemotherapy, endocrine therapy, HER2-targeted therapy, and surgery. All patients completed treatment with no evidence of distant recurrence at the time of last follow-up. Conclusion: Discordant BBC highlights the importance of individualized treatment strategies and tumor board-based decision-making. Therapeutic planning should be guided by the most aggressive tumor phenotype, while ensuring comprehensive care for both malignancies. Keywords

Background: Bilateral breast cancer (BBC) with discordant immunohistochemical (IHC) profiles is uncommon but presents significant challenges in diagnosis and treatment. When tumors in each breast exhibit distinct receptor status—such as triple-negative in one and hormone receptor-positive or HER2-positive in the other—treatment decisions become complex. Methods: We retrospectively analyzed five patients diagnosed between 2020 and 2024 with synchronous bilateral breast cancer exhibiting discordant IHC profiles. Clinicopathological characteristics, treatment regimens, and outcomes were reviewed. Results: All five patients presented with distinct molecular subtypes between the two breasts. Combinations included triple-negative and luminal A, HER2-positive and luminal B, and other discordant patterns. All were managed with personalized treatment plans addressing each tumor's biology. Treatment included combinations of chemotherapy, endocrine therapy, HER2-targeted therapy, and surgery. All patients completed treatment with no evidence of distant recurrence at the time of last follow-up. Conclusion: Discordant BBC highlights the importance of individualized treatment strategies and tumor board-based decision-making. Therapeutic planning should be guided by the most aggressive tumor phenotype, while ensuring comprehensive care for both malignancies. Keywords

Background: In Dimong Village, Madiun Regency, East Java, Indonesia, showed a hypertension prevalence of 40%, higher than the national. Passive smoking is a risk factor for hypertension, and 41.7% suffer from hypertension. However, sometimes passive smokers have lower resting blood pressure. What is the relationship between passive smoking status and the incidence of hypertension? This study aims to determine the relationship between the two. Methods: This cross-sectional study was conducted in Dimong Village. A total of 94 individuals aged 18 years and over were selected as respondents using simple random sampling and met the sample criteria. The study variables consisted of passive smoking and hypertension. In addition to blood pressure measurements using a digital sphygmomanometer, respondents were also interviewed to determine whether their status as passive smokers was related to their hypertension using a questionnaire. The data obtained were then analyzed using a chi-square test to determine the relationship between the two variables. Results: The incidence of passive smoking remains high (81.91%), particularly among those aged 61-70, women, those with low levels of education, and those who are unemployed (housewives). Similarly, the incidence of hypertension remains high (52.12%), with similar characteristics, but is more prevalent among those who have graduated from high school or its equivalent. The probability value of the association between passive smoking and hypertension is 0.162. Conclusion: Passive smoking is not associated with hypertension. Similar research is needed, taking into account the distribution of passive smoking and the more varied incidence of hypertension.

Introduction: Congenital anomalies of the carpus are rare, and scaphoid agenesis is an exceptionally uncommon condition. Most reported cases involve unilateral absence and are frequently associated with other malformations such as thumb hypoplasia or radial hemimelia. No previous reports have described isolated bilateral agenesis of the proximal pole of the scaphoid. Materials and Methods: We present the case of a 32-year-old male evaluated for intermittent right-wrist pain. Clinical examination was complemented with bilateral wrist radiographs, computed tomography, and magnetic resonance imaging to characterize carpal anatomy and exclude associated abnormalities. Results: Imaging revealed bilateral congenital agenesis of the proximal pole of the scaphoid with preservation of the distal portion. No additional skeletal, systemic, or soft-tissue anomalies were identified. The patient had no significant medical or family history of congenital disorders. Physical examination demonstrated normal wrist alignment, full range of motion, and no functional limitations. Because symptoms were mild and the wrist remained stable, conservative management with periodic follow-up was recommended. Discussion: This appears to be the first documented case of isolated bilateral congenital agenesis of the proximal pole of the scaphoid. The patient’s benign clinical course supports a non-interventional approach. Recognition of this rare variant is crucial to avoid misdiagnosis, particularly confusion with post-traumatic conditions. Conclusion: Isolated bilateral congenital agenesis of the proximal pole of the scaphoid represents a previously undescribed anatomical variant. Awareness of this condition may prevent unnecessary interventions and contributes to understanding congenital carpal anomalies.

Mental health among adolescents in North Lombok, Indonesia, has become an urgent concern due to the high prevalence of psychological disorders following the 2018 earthquake. This community service program aimed to improve mental health literacy and screen psychological conditions among senior high school students through a structured educational seminar and training session. Forty students participated in the intervention, which included pre- and post-tests to evaluate knowledge gains, as well as completion of the Self-Reporting Questionnaire-29 (SRQ-29) to assess psychological conditions. The findings showed a significant increase in knowledge post-intervention (mean increase = 13.87 points, p < 0.05). SRQ-29 results revealed that 80.49% of respondents experienced depression/anxiety/stress, 70.73% showed psychotic symptoms, and 92.68% met the criteria for PTSD. Co-occurrence of multiple disorders was common, with 45% of students experiencing all three simultaneously. These figures significantly exceed national and international post-disaster mental health data. The program highlights the importance of school-based mental health initiatives, particularly in disaster-prone regions, and supports the use of early screening combined with psychoeducational efforts to mitigate long-term psychological effects in vulnerable youth populations.

Interleukin-9, or IL-9, plays a role in allergic inflammation, autoimmunity, and tumor immunity. Despite its biological relevance, measuring IL-9 in human serum is hard. The levels are usually low, and most standard protein detection techniques are not sensitive enough to detect it. This study aimed to determine the detection threshold of IL-9 using chemiluminescent Western blotting and evaluate its applicability for measuring endogenous IL-9 levels in serum samples from healthy individuals. We performed serial dilutions of recombinant IL-9 from 20 ng to 0.01 ng and analyzed them alongside serum samples (S15, S10, S5) from healthy volunteers by Western blotting. Signal intensity for each was assessed by subtracting the background signal to determine the detection limits. Membrane stripping, three-layer antibody amplification, immunoprecipitation, and prolonged exposure were trialed to enhance sensitivity as part of an optimization approach. IL-9 was effectively detected at concentrations ≥5 ng, with signal intensity dropping nattily below this threshold. Serum samples showed a negligible signal, implying that endogenous IL-9 concentrations in healthy individuals fell below the assay’s detection limit. Also, signal enhancement strategies failed to improve detection at lower concentrations. Western blotting is suitable for confirming the presence of IL-9 at nanogram levels but is insufficient for detecting physiological concentrations in serum. These findings underscore the need for more sensitive platforms, such as ELISA or digital immunoassays, to accurately quantify low-abundance cytokines, such as IL-9, in clinical samples.

Right heart catheterization (RHC) is a critical procedure for diagnosing and managing cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) such as heart failure, congenital heart disease, pulmonary edema, and pulmonary hypertension. However, currently prevalent manual RHC procedures requires continuous communication of clinicians between the main control room and the operating room, leading to navigation inaccuracies and increased physical workload for clinicians during prolonged procedure. To overcome these challenges, this paper introduces a robotic system that enables autonomous RHC (Auto-RHC) by transferring a catheter decision-making model from patient-specific digital twins to real-world robotic intervention using deep learning (DL) algorithms. By creating a patient-specific (PS) digital twin using the Simulation Open Framework Architecture (SOFA) and conducting virtual RHC interventions, images capturing the catheter balloon’s position and aligned behavioral datasets were collected and utilized as input for a convolutional neural network (CNN) architecture. The trained catheter decision-making model derived from the digital twin was then transferred to real-world implementations of robot-assisted Auto-RHC. Experimental results validated the performance of the digital twin and demonstrated that the real-world robotic Auto-RHC achieved a high success rate across both static (≥ 96%) and dynamic heartbeat (≥ 94%) patient-specific cardiac phantoms. Furthermore, AutoRHC enhanced navigation consistency by ≥ 34.63% compared to expert manual operation.

Major depressive episodes (MDEs) are highly recurrent in clinical samples. However, the course of MDEs and predictors of their endurance are unclear in the general youth population. We investigated prospective factors associated with enduring MDE (the presence of 12-month DSM-IV MDE at baseline and 1 year using the Composite International Diagnostic Interview-Screening Scales) in 1,833 participants of a 1-year epidemiological youth cohort study in Hong Kong. Multivariable logistic regression models were used to examine the influences of a range of personal and environmental factors. At baseline, 13.7% participants had MDEs, among whom 21.1% presented enduring MDEs. More severe symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder (adjusted odds ratio [aOR] = 5.54, confidence interval [CI] = 2.14-14.38), depression (aOR = 3.92, CI = 1.79-8.62), and generalized anxiety (aOR = 2.27, CI = 1.21-4.25) at baseline were among the strongest associated factors for enduring MDE, with trends of associations observed for psychotic-like experiences (aOR = 1.98, CI = 0.98-4.02) and eating disorder symptoms (aOR = 1.88, CI = 0.90-3.95). Among various types of stressors, only dependent stressors at follow-up showed a clear association with enduring MDE (aOR = 4.22, CI = 1.81-9.83). Those with enduring MDE showed poorer functioning and mental health-related quality of life at follow-up, with only 35.6% having sought any psychiatric/psychological help during the past year. Detecting comorbid symptoms in those with prior MDEs and reducing the impact of dependent stressors may help reduce their long-term implications. Enhancing the accessibility and acceptability of youth-targeted mental health services would also be crucial to improve help-seeking.

This is an analogue photogram that forms part of an ongoing body of work documenting the flora and fauna around the Scottish coastline. The work was handprinted in the colour darkrooms at Gray's School of Art, RGU.

Background : Coverage of many routine childhood vaccinations in Afghanistan is low and declining. For instance, only 60% of eligible children received doses of the pentavalent vaccine in 2013–18, and this fell to 51% in 2022/23. Objective : To help explain the underlying causes behind this trend, this study aims to identify socio-demographic factors relating to caregivers whose children are either entirely unvaccinated or only partially vaccinated. Method : A secondary analysis of Multi Indictor Cluster survey (MICS) 2022/23 data was conducted that focused on the level of vaccination children had received by the time they reach their first birthday. Children were categorized into unvaccinated, under-vaccinated, and fully vaccinated groups and binary and multinomial logistic regression models were fitted with household characteristics included as explanatory variables. Results : The study data comprised 6,178 children aged 12–23 months with a predominance of rural areas (76.2%). In the multinomial analysis, children from Pashto-speaking households had significantly higher odds of being unvaccinated (OR = 3.54, 95% CI: 2.62–4.79) and under-vaccinated (OR = 2.19, 95% CI: 1.74–2.75) compared with those who were fully vaccinated. Maternal education was found to be highly significant, with children whose mothers had no formal education found to be more likely to be under vaccinated (69.1% unvaccinated/under-vaccinated) compared to those with primary education (41.9% unvaccinated/under-vaccinated, adjusted odds ratio: 0.59. 95% CI: 0.43–0.81). Children from the richest households had a full vaccination rate of 55.9% and were less likely to be unvaccinated than fully vaccinated (adjusted odds ratio: 0.22, 95% CI: 0.14–0.35). Conclusion : Full vaccination coverage is low, with approximately one-third of Afghan children aged 12–23 months receiving complete vaccine schedules. However, this study shows that rates vary significantly with a range of cultural, economic, and educational factors. These findings suggest that improving maternal healthcare access and education, along with focused outreach in specific demographic groups, may be effective in enhancing immunization coverage.

Thyroid carcinoma is a malignancy of the thyroid gland and it is the most common endocrine tumor. Globally, thyroid carcinoma ranks 7th in incidence and 24th in mortality, while in Indonesia, thyroid carcinoma ranks 12th among all carcinomas. Therefore, this study aims to determine the clinical, laboratory, and histopathological profiles of thyroid carcinoma patients. This study used a retrospective descriptive method with total sampling technique. The data were collected from medical records of thyroid carcinoma patients at Dr. Soetomo General Academic Hospital from January 2020 to June 2024. A total of 141 thyroid carcinoma patients were enrolled in this research. Most were aged 51-60 years (34.0%) and female (74.5%). The most commonly reported symptoms were a lump in the neck (100%), hoarseness (19.9%), and pain in the lump (15.6%). Nodules were commonly found to be >4 cm (49.6%), predominantly on the right side of the neck (36.9%). Most patients had normal FT4 (66.0%) and TSH levels (61.7%). Most patients had TR5 ultrasound results (44.7%). The most common histopathological type is papillary (91.5%), and stage 1 (47.5%) is the most common stage. Lymph nodes were the most frequent site of metastasis (36.2%). In conclusion, thyroid carcinoma most commonly occurs in patients aged 51-60 years, predominantly female, and the main complaint is a lump in the neck. Most patients have normal laboratory results and TR5 ultrasound results. The most common type is papillary, at stage 1, with the most common metastasis to lymph nodes.

Diabetes is frequently referred to as the "mother of all diseases" because of its extensive impact on the body's organs. Heart disease is one of the main dangers connected with diabetes, so prompt detection and treatment are essential because neglect can result in major problems. The Optimal Scrutiny Boosted Graph Convolutional LSTM (O-SBGC-LSTM) is a revolutionary technique introduced in this paper. With the goal of early diabetes identification and prevention, this approach improves the SBGC-LSTM by hyperparameter tuning utilizing the Eurygaster Optimization Algorithm (EOA). illustrations. The O-SBGC-LSTM explores the connections between these two domains and efficiently captures key elements in both spatial and temporal configurations. It greatly lowers computing costs while enhancing the model's capacity to learn high-level semantic representations by extending the temporal receptive fields of the top SBGC-LSTM layer through the use of a temporal hierarchical design. Overall, the LSTM model's performance is deemed adequate, and numerous tests show that the suggested hybrid deep learning strategy outperforms conventional machine learning techniques in terms of accuracy. Additionally, emphasis is placed on prevention over treatment. Suggestion tables and fuzzy-based inference approaches are used to improve the prevention process.

Temporomandibular disorders (TMD) represent a group of multifactorial musculoskeletal conditions that cause pain and dysfunction in the temporomandibular joint (TMJ), masticatory muscles, and associated structures. Various animal models have been developed to elucidate the biological mechanisms and potential therapeutic targets of TMD. This systematic review summarizes the main types of animal models used in TMD research, including inflammatory, mechanical, surgical, and psychological stress models. Each model demonstrates unique advantages in replicating specific pathological features such as inflammation, cartilage degeneration, or chronic pain. However, none can fully reproduce the complexity of human TMD, which involves biomechanical, inflammatory, and psychosocial interactions. The combination of inflammatory and mechanical loading models appears most relevant to clinical conditions, while psychological stress models provide insight into the neuroendocrine mechanisms underlying chronic pain. Future research should focus on developing multifactorial animal models and employing advanced imaging and molecular tools to enhance translational validity.

Background: Growth hormone (GH) plays a central role in childhood growth and metabolic regulation, yet its diagnostic evaluation remains challenging because of its pulsatile secretion and sensitivity to factors such as puberty, sleep, nutrition, and adiposity. Over the past 25 years, advances in assay technology and a deeper understanding of GH–IGF physiology have highlighted major limitations of traditional stimulation tests and IGF-1–based screening, underscoring the need for an updated, integrated diagnostic framework for pediatric GH deficiency (GHD). Objectives: To synthesize current evidence (2000–2025) on GH secretion physiology, diagnostic performance of GH stimulation tests, IGF-1, and IGFBP-3, and the modifying effects of puberty, BMI, and assay generation; and to propose a modern stepwise diagnostic strategy for accurate early identification of GHD. Methods: A narrative literature review was performed using PubMed, Scopus, and Google Scholar (2000–2025), including pediatric studies assessing GH secretion, GH stimulation tests, IGF-1/IGFBP-3 performance, and pubertal or BMI influences. Mechanistic and classical physiologic studies were included for context. Findings were synthesized into thematic domains and structured comparative tables. Results: Across the literature, GH secretion increased two- to three-fold from Tanner I to Tanner III–IV, driven mainly by increased pulse amplitude rather than frequency. Parallel rises in IGF-1 and IGFBP-3 peaked in mid-puberty and declined in late adolescence, creating clearly stage-dependent physiological reference points. Failure of GH or IGF-1 to rise appropriately during mid-puberty strongly differentiated true GHD from constitutional or obesity-related patterns. GH stimulation tests showed moderate-to-good sensitivity but only modest specificity, with substantial variability across stimuli and assays. Newer chemiluminescent assays produced lower GH peaks, indicating that historical 10 ng/mL cutoffs are no longer valid for many laboratories. Diagnostic accuracy improved when two different stimulation tests were used and when GH values were interpreted alongside Tanner stage and BMI rather than as isolated results. IGF-1 and IGFBP-3 alone lacked sufficient sensitivity but demonstrated good specificity; combining both biomarkers or using IGF-1/IGFBP-3 ratios improved classification. Obesity consistently suppressed spontaneous GH pulsatility and reduced stimulated GH peaks, while also lowering IGF-1 specificity, confirming the need for BMI-adjusted cutoffs. Tanner III–IV represented the most physiologically informative stage for distinguishing delayed puberty from true GHD. Nocturnal GH sampling and IGF-1 generation tests had limited routine value but remained useful in selecting diagnostic dilemmas. Conclusion: Accurate diagnosis of pediatric GHD requires an integrated, context-dependent approach that combines auxologic parameters, pubertal staging, BMI, IGF-1/IGFBP-3 interpretation, assay-specific GH cutoffs, and pituitary MRI. Such a strategy reduces misclassification and supports timely, appropriate therapy for children with true GHD.

Background: There are numerous challenges associated with raising a child that have sickle cell disease (SCD). Invitro fertilization with pre-implantation genetic diagnosis (IVF w PGD) is a reproduction alternative that reduces the risk for giving birth to a child with SCD among at risk couples. However, awareness and acceptability of this option is largely unassessed in our environment. Objective: To assess the awareness and acceptability of IVF w PGD as reproduction alternative for reducing the risk for giving birth to children with SCD among couples with children affected by SCD. Materials and Methods: Seventy-three biological parents of children with SCD were interviewed with semi-structured questionnaire following consent at the Paediatric Haematology outpatient clinic of ESUT Teaching hospital Parklane, Enugu. Convenient sampling method was used. Data obtained was entered into SPSS version 26 and later exported to SPSS version 29 with which it was analyzed. Results: Only 2 (2.7%) of the respondents were aware of IVF w PGD as reproduction alternative for reducing the risk for having a child with SCD among at risk couples. However, after education about the option it was acceptable to as many as 59 respondents (80.8%). Conclusion: Awareness of IVF w PGD as reproduction alternative for reducing the risk of giving birth to children with SCD was abysmally low among the respondents however following education about the option acceptability was reasonably high. Increasing awareness about IVF w PGD is therefore hereby recommended as a strategy to reduce the burden of SCD in our environment.

Median Arcuate Ligament Syndrome (MALS) is a rare condition resulting from external compression of the celiac trunk by the median arcuate ligament. The clinical presentation is often nonspecific typically postprandial abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and weight loss leading to frequent diagnostic delays. CT angiography plays a pivotal role in identifying the characteristic celiac artery stenosis and post-stenotic dilatation. We report three clinical cases: two young female patients and one 61-year-old male presenting with chronic abdominal pain and weight loss. CT angiography confirmed significant celiac trunk stenosis in all cases, with post-stenotic aneurysmal dilatation in two patients and collateral circulation in one. All underwent open surgical decompression through division of the median arcuate ligament. Postoperative outcomes were favorable, with marked improvement in abdominal symptoms and progressive weight gain. Follow-up CT angiography demonstrated a fully patent celiac trunk without residual stenosis. MALS is a challenging diagnostic entity requiring careful correlation between clinical manifestations and dynamic imaging findings. CT angiography remains essential for diagnosis and preoperative planning. Surgical decompression provides substantial symptomatic relief in appropriately selected patients. Larger prospective studies are needed to identify predictors of optimal postoperative outcomes

The lifestyle of students is influenced by sports, hygiene, eating habits, and alcohol and tobacco consumption, especially during a health crisis when lockdown is recommended. This study aimed to examine the lifestyle of students enrolled in middle schools in northern Benin. To this end, the study was conducted in three carefully selected middle schools in northern Benin and involved 1,500 students, including 892 boys, who were selected using a non- random method and random selection technique. A questionnaire was used to collect information on the students' lifestyles. Lifestyles were assessed as good or poor. The results revealed that the lifestyle of 86.3% of the students surveyed was considered poor. Sports, hygiene, eating habits, and food consumption had a strong influence on the students' lifestyles (p < 0.001). The poor lifestyle of students requires action to change their behavior in order to maintain and preserve a well-being that is conducive to their overall development and, above all, their academic success.

Subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) is a type of hemorrhagic stroke that occurs due to the rupture of an intracranial aneurysm, with high morbidity and mortality rates. One of the most common complications is Terson's syndrome (TS). Intraocular hemorrhage can occur simultaneously in patients with SAH due to a rapid increase in intracranial pressure. Terson syndrome has significance for the clinical markers of SAH, including the mechanism, degree of severity, and implications. A systematic literature review was conducted to assess the significance of Terson syndrome for subarachnoid hemorrhage. The sources used were publications from the last five years that were relevant to the topic. The results of the study show that Terson syndrome has significance for clinical markers of SAH, such as low GCS scores, high Hunt and Hess scores, and high Fisher Scale scores, all of which are markers of severe SAH.

Bandages are a crucial part of clinical and sports medicine and serve the purpose of wound management, providing compression, and supporting the musculoskeletal structure. Self-adhesive and cohesive bandages are commonly used, but they differ in their adhesion mechanisms and their clinical applications. Adhesive bandages stick directly on the skin, thus ensuring secure fixation for dressing of wounds, while cohesive bandages stick only to each other. So, they provide stable compression and support to the joints without coming into direct contact with the skin. This review presents a systematic comparison of these two types of bandages based on the published literature, technical specifications, and clinical observations, with a focus on adhesion, skin tolerance, ease of application, durability under perspiration, and functional performance. The quantitative data reveal that self-adhesive bandages can have a loss of adhesion of up to 30-40% due to very humid conditions or sweating and in some cases may lead to mild-to-moderate skin irritation, especially in sensitive patients. On the other hand, cohesive bandages not only hold their grip and compression but also are painless when removed and need proper wrapping to ensure the right pressure is applied throughout. The discussion is around the advantages, disadvantages, and best-use scenarios which are critically appraised, and a clinical decision framework is proposed for choosing bandages with regard to skin sensitivity, activity level, and therapeutic goals. The gaps that have been identified include a lack of standardized testing, variability in outcomes over the long term, and the unexploited potential of advanced materials such as hypoallergenic adhesives, textile composites, and smart fabrics. The review points out that the proper bandage selection weighs the factors of clinical effectiveness, patient comfort, and environmental conditions. The use of new materials and better application methods may further improve performance and safety, thus leading to better results not only in healthcare but also in sports.

Background: Growth hormone (GH) plays a central role in childhood growth and metabolic regulation, yet its diagnostic evaluation remains challenging because of its pulsatile secretion and sensitivity to factors such as puberty, sleep, nutrition, and adiposity. Over the past 25 years, advances in assay technology and a deeper understanding of GH–IGF physiology have highlighted major limitations of traditional stimulation tests and IGF-1–based screening, underscoring the need for an updated, integrated diagnostic framework for pediatric GH deficiency (GHD). Objectives: To synthesize current evidence (2000–2025) on GH secretion physiology, diagnostic performance of GH stimulation tests, IGF-1, and IGFBP-3, and the modifying effects of puberty, BMI, and assay generation; and to propose a modern stepwise diagnostic strategy for accurate early identification of GHD. Methods: A narrative literature review was performed using PubMed, Scopus, and Google Scholar (2000–2025), including pediatric studies assessing GH secretion, GH stimulation tests, IGF-1/IGFBP-3 performance, and pubertal or BMI influences. Mechanistic and classical physiologic studies were included for context. Findings were synthesized into thematic domains and structured comparative tables. Results: Across the literature, GH secretion increased two- to three-fold from Tanner I to Tanner III–IV, driven mainly by increased pulse amplitude rather than frequency. Parallel rises in IGF-1 and IGFBP-3 peaked in mid-puberty and declined in late adolescence, creating clearly stage-dependent physiological reference points. Failure of GH or IGF-1 to rise appropriately during mid-puberty strongly differentiated true GHD from constitutional or obesity-related patterns. GH stimulation tests showed moderate-to-good sensitivity but only modest specificity, with substantial variability across stimuli and assays. Newer chemiluminescent assays produced lower GH peaks, indicating that historical 10 ng/mL cutoffs are no longer valid for many laboratories. Diagnostic accuracy improved when two different stimulation tests were used and when GH values were interpreted alongside Tanner stage and BMI rather than as isolated results. IGF-1 and IGFBP-3 alone lacked sufficient sensitivity but demonstrated good specificity; combining both biomarkers or using IGF-1/IGFBP-3 ratios improved classification. Obesity consistently suppressed spontaneous GH pulsatility and reduced stimulated GH peaks, while also lowering IGF-1 specificity, confirming the need for BMI-adjusted cutoffs. Tanner III–IV represented the most physiologically informative stage for distinguishing delayed puberty from true GHD. Nocturnal GH sampling and IGF-1 generation tests had limited routine value but remained useful in selecting diagnostic dilemmas. Conclusion: Accurate diagnosis of pediatric GHD requires an integrated, context-dependent approach that combines auxologic parameters, pubertal staging, BMI, IGF-1/IGFBP-3 interpretation, assay-specific GH cutoffs, and pituitary MRI. Such a strategy reduces misclassification and supports timely, appropriate therapy for children with true GHD.

Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (PanNETs) are uncommon pancreatic neoplasms that develop from islet cells. The existing method of preoperative tissue diagnosis and grading is ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration of the mass. We present a case of a 42-year-old female who presented with a six-month history of nonspecific epigastric pain and unintentional weight loss. Imaging showed a small pancreatic mass with increased vascularity in the pancreatic tail. Chromogranin A serum levels were elevated. The diagnostic material was not collected according to the standard Endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration (EUS-FNA) procedure, but rather via the less common external (abdominal, percutaneous) ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration (US-FNA) with rapid onsite evaluation (ROSE). It was well-differentiated, Grade 1 PanNET, and, with immunohistochemistry (IHC), positive for Synaptophysin and Chromogranin A, with low Ki-67 (2%). Laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy, splenectomy, and R0 resection were performed. At 3-year follow-up, she was recurrence-free. The case has shown that external US-FNA has high diagnostic accuracy, especially in facilities with limited EUS expertise, or when the lesion can be approached percutaneously, which has proved useful for good preoperative grading even in small tumors and for leading to definitive curative surgery.

In the study of complimentary healing of COVID-19 remedies, 41 traditional disease complexes were treated by 10 different routes of administration using 19 mono-ingredient and 7 multi-ingredient compositions. Preparation methods included boiling in water (28%), burning the materials (48%), crushing the materials to release the aroma (21%) and slight heating of the materials (3%). Some of the mono-ingredient recipes reported in the study were observed to have similar uses in other parts of the world, whereas poly-herbal remedies were found to be unique without any similar report. Scientific characterization of the herbal remedies can contribute to the endorsement of traditional vapour-based therapies in the modern health care systems. Findings from these ‘‘new usage’’ reports of plants and unique combinations of poly-herbal compositions indicate the importance of such documentation efforts.

Pheochromocytoma is a rare, potentially lethal tumor that can be revealed by pregnancy, often mimicking a clinical picture of pre-eclampsia. We report the case of a pheochromocytoma that occurred in the 1st trimester, presenting with episodes of arterial hypertension (AHT). Treatment consisted of preoperative medical preparation followed by surgery. The maternal and fetal outcome was favorable. The occurrence of pheochromocytoma during pregnancy poses a problem in both diagnosis and blood pressure control. The therapeutic strategy depends on the gestational age, the maternal-fetal outcome (retention), and the response to medical treatment.

Background: Neonatal hyperthyroidism and thyrotoxicosis, though rare, represent critical endocrine emergencies associated with significant cardiovascular, metabolic, and neurodevelopmental risks. Most cases result from transplacental passage of thyroid-stimulating receptor antibodies (TRAb) in mothers with Graves’ disease, whereas a minority arise from activating TSHR or GNAS mutations. Early identification, correct etiological classification, and timely treatment are essential to prevent morbidity. Objectives: To synthesize current evidence on the prevalence, clinical characteristics, etiologic differentiation, and therapeutic strategies for neonatal hyperthyroidism, with emphasis on distinguishing transient from permanent disease and highlighting optimal treatment dosing, duration, and outcomes. Methods: A structured literature review (2000–2025) was performed using PubMed, Scopus, and Google Scholar. Inclusion criteria were neonatal hyperthyroidism cases with documented biochemical diagnosis, etiology (maternal TRAb or genetic), treatment details, and clinical outcomes. Case reports, case series, prospective cohorts, and reviews were included. Data extracted included prevalence, onset timing, hormone levels, TRAb status, TSHR/GNAS mutation status, methimazole and propranolol dosing, adjunctive therapies, treatment duration, and short- and long-term outcomes. Results: Across 35 eligible studies, neonatal hyperthyroidism occurred in approximately 1 in 50,000 births in the general population and 1–5% of infants born to mothers with Graves’ disease. Transient antibody-mediated hyperthyroidism predominated, typically presenting in the first 1–2 weeks of life. Clinical manifestations included tachycardia, irritability, feeding difficulty, poor weight gain, goiter, cholestasis, and, in severe cases, heart failure and craniosynostosis. Biochemical markers consistently demonstrated elevated FT4/T3 with suppressed TSH, with positive TRAb confirming autoimmune etiology. Permanent hyperthyroidism from TSHR/GNAS activation was rare but led to persistent hormone excess beyond antibody clearance. Methimazole (MMI) emerged as the preferred therapy, used at 0.25–1.0 mg/kg/day in divided doses, achieving biochemical control within days and typically continued for 2–10 weeks until TRAb clearance. Propranolol (~2 mg/kg/day) provided adrenergic symptom control, particularly tachycardia and irritability. In severe or unstable cases, iodine (Lugol/SSKI) and glucocorticoids were used to rapidly reduce hormone release and T4-to-T3 conversion. Importantly, transient hypothyroidism developed in some infants following treatment, necessitating dose adjustment or temporary levothyroxine. Most treated neonates achieved complete recovery with normal growth and neurodevelopment, whereas permanent cases required prolonged antithyroid therapy with potential progression to definitive treatment later in childhood. Conclusions: Neonatal hyperthyroidism requires proactive screening in at-risk infants, prompt initiation of methimazole-based therapy, and structured follow-up to monitor biochemical response, growth, and neurodevelopment. Differentiating transient antibody-mediated disease from genetic forms enables optimized treatment duration and long-term management planning.

Candida albicans is an opportunistic fungal pathogen that commonly causes infections in humans, particularly in immunocompromised individuals. It is responsible for various infections, including oral thrush, vaginal candidiasis, and systemic candidiasis with mortality rate of 25-60% in systemic candidemia Herbal drugs have found wide spread use in many countries because they are easily, available, cheaper, and safer than synthetics drug (Wanjari & Wanjari, 2019). According to World Health Organization (WHO) about 80% of people worldwide are currently depending on traditional medicine for their primary health care needs. The aim of our study was to compare the antimicrobial efficacy of garlic (Allium Sativum) and Aloe vera (Aloe barbadensis millar) extracts against Candida albicans. Zones of inhibition were measured in millimeters to determine antifungal activity. It is concluded that garlic extract is more effective than aloe vera in inhibiting the grow of Candida alblicans.

Schizophrenia is a severe mental disorder characterized by disturbances in thought processes, emotions, perceptions, and behaviors that are influenced by biological, psychological, and social factors. Data from the Southeast Sulawesi Provincial Mental Hospital shows an increase in schizophrenia cases from year to year, so a study is needed to find out the factors that affect the occurrence of this disorder. This study aims to analyze the influence of education, family support, income, and social environment on the incidence of schizophrenia in inpatients at the Southeast Sulawesi Provincial Psychiatric Hospital. This study is a quantitative research with a cross sectional design. The population is all schizophrenic patients who will be hospitalized by 2025, with sampling using the Simple random sampling technique. Data collection was carried out using structured questionnaires, and data analysis included univariate, bivariate, and multivariate logistic regression. The results of the study showed that education, family support, income, and social environment had a significant effect on the incidence of schizophrenia. Family support and a negative social environment increase the risk of schizophrenia, while higher education and income play a protective role. The most dominant variable was family support. This study emphasizes the importance of family-based interventions and strengthening socioeconomic factors in efforts to prevent and control schizophrenia.

Background: Periodontitis is a chronic inflammatory disease of periodontal tissues with an age-standardized prevalence rate (ASPR) of 12,498.3 per 100,000 population (GBD 2021), and 74.1% of Indonesians suffer from periodontal problems (Riskesdas 2018). Conventional diagnostic methods are invasive, subjective, and tend to detect disease at an advanced stage. Saliva has the potential as a non-invasive diagnostic alternative through portable biosensors and digital integration. Objective: This review aims to analyze the potential integration of saliva-based biosensors with digital systems in enhancing the effectiveness of diagnosis and monitoring of periodontitis. Methods: A literature search was conducted on PubMed, ScienceDirect, Research Gate and Google Scholar using predetermined keywords and the results were limited to articles published in 2020-2025 Discussion: Biosensors are used as Point-of-Care Testing (POCT) by detecting saliva inflammatory biomarkers, then integrated with digital technology for biomonitoring, such as smartphones, artificial intelligence, or Internet of Things (IoT) in the form of mouth guards and intraoral patches. Surface Plasmon Resonance-based Plasmonic Fiber-Optic Biosensors work by utilizing specific antigen-antibody bonds detected by spectrophotometry, while Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) works by measuring changes in resistance or impedance at the electrode. Molecularly Imprinted Polymer (MIP) detects biomarkers by electric current changes and then converts them into concentrations. Biomarker signals detected by biosensors are transmitted wirelessly to external devices, where noise is filtered using deep learning, thereby improving accuracy and also enabling real-time personalized monitoring. Conclusion: Saliva biosensors as POCT and digital biomonitoring offer earlier, minimally invasive, rapid, and personalized disease detection.

Introduction: Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis (JIA) can significantly impact children’s quality of life by restricting their participation in everyday activities and affecting their psychosocial development. School nurses can provide education and counseling to children with JIA and their families regarding the disease, its symptoms, and management strategies, affecting their quality of life (QoL) positively. Aim: The aim of the review was to explore the role of the school nurse in improving the quality of life of children with JIA. Additionally, the study sought to map the existing literature on this topic and identify potential research gaps. Methodology: For the purposes of this study, a scoping review methodology was adopted. The literature search was conducted across academic databases using the keywords “juvenile idiopathic arthritis”, “quality of life”, “school nurse”, “intervention”, and “psychosocial support”. Findings: A total of 139 studies were identified, however only two studies met the inclusion criteria. Parents reported that their experiences with school nurses were largely supportive, although there was some variation among nurses and across school levels. Some adolescents described greater support and less stigma from school nurses when they were younger, while others noted improvements as they grew older. The availability of the school nurse emerged as a critical factor for children with JIA. The nurse’s role extended beyond medical care to include psychological support and the enhancement of the child’s sense of safety within the school environment. Conclusions: JIA negatively affects children’s quality of life, while the school nurse can play a significant role in supporting and enhancing it. However, a clear gap was identified in the existing literature regarding the contribution of the school nurse, highlighting the need for further research.

Inflammation is the body's natural biological response to tissue injury, playing a crucial role in the wound healing process. However, excessive inflammation can prolong the initial phase of healing, thereby inhibiting tissue repair. One natural alternative known for its anti-inflammatory effects is cayenne pepper extract (Capsicum frutescens L). Cayenne pepper contains the main bioactive compounds, namely vitamin C and capsaicin. Vitamin C acts as an antioxidant, supports collagen synthesis, and has anti-inflammatory properties. Meanwhile, capsaicin functions as an antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory, and stimulates fibroblast activity and angiogenesis. This combination of active substances creates an environment conducive to accelerating the transition from the inflammatory to the proliferative phase, thereby promoting faster wound healing. This study aims to determine the transition from the inflammatory to the proliferative phase, thereby promoting faster wound healing. Methods: A pretest–posttest control group design with five treatment groups: negative control group (NaCl 0.9%), positive control group (povidone-iodine 10%), and three treatment groups with 5%, 10%, and 15% concentrations of cayenne pepper extract ointment. Results showed that cayenne pepper extract significantly reduced erythema, suppressed edema, decreased wound fluid production, accelerated granulation tissue formation, and hastened wound length reduction, providing a superior effect in wound healing compared to the control groups. Thus, cayenne pepper extract has the potential to be an effective natural topical agent in accelerating wound healing through anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and antimicrobial mechanisms. Conclusion: The 15% concentration of cayenne pepper extract was found to be the most effective and optimal dose for accelerating wound healing.

Fibro-cemento-osseous dysplasias are benign fibro-osseous lesions that develop when normal bone tissue is replaced by fibrous tissue and cement-like structures. These lesions are generally asymptomatic and occur more frequently in women. Initially, the lesions appear radiolucent on radiographs, but they gradually acquire a mixed radiolucent-radioopaque appearance. In advanced stages, the lesions transform into radioopaque structures surrounded by a thin radiolucent band. This case report presents the 10-year radiological evolution findings of a 45-year-old female patient with focal cemento-osseous dysplasia. The dysplasia was incidentally detected in the right posterior mandibular region during a routine dental examination. The findings reveal the lesion's characteristic radiological evolution with enlargement of the radioopaque aspect and its clinically asymptomatic course.

Background: Chronic dermatological conditions such as vitiligo, psoriasis, and acne pose significant therapeutic challenges due to their multifactorial etiologies and frequent resistance to conventional treatments. The Functional Medicine (FM) model offers a systems-based, root-cause-oriented approach that integrates nutritional, immunological, and lifestyle interventions. Objective: To document the clinical outcomes of six patients with treatment-resistant dermatological conditions—four from Bangladesh and two from the United States—managed through a personalized FM protocol. Methods: All patients were diagnosed with vitiligo, psoriasis, or hormonal acne and had previously failed conventional therapies. A structured FM protocol was implemented, including comprehensive laboratory profiling, elimination diets, targeted nutraceuticals, lifestyle modifications, and adjunctive therapies. Outcomes were assessed using PASI, VASI, DLQI, and photographic documentation. Results: All patients demonstrated rapid and sustained clinical improvement. Pediatric vitiligo resolved completely within three months. Psoriasis patients achieved 80–100% plaque clearance within one to eight months. The US-based acne patient showed a 90% reduction in lesions and normalization of hormonal markers. No adverse events were reported. Conclusion: This transcontinental case series provides preliminary evidence that a root-cause Functional Medicine approach can facilitate remission in complex dermatological conditions. The consistent outcomes across diverse populations support further investigation through controlled trials.

The accelerating frequency and complexity of infectious disease outbreaks have exposed limitations in traditional surveillance systems, which often rely on delayed reporting, fragmented data streams, and resource-intensive manual analysis. To address these challenges, artificial intelligence (AI) is increasingly being integrated into public health infrastructure to enhance early detection, situational awareness, and real-time outbreak forecasting. AI-driven surveillance systems leverage machine learning, natural language processing, and spatiotemporal modeling to continuously monitor diverse data sources including electronic health records, laboratory submissions, social media signals, mobility patterns, and environmental indicators to identify anomalies that may signal emerging health threats. At a broader level, these systems enable national and global health agencies to shift from reactive responses to proactive, data-informed strategies that minimize transmission, optimize resource allocation, and support timely public health interventions. Progress in cloud computing, distributed data architectures, and edge AI has further enabled the deployment of real-time surveillance networks capable of processing high-velocity data with minimal latency. Within this framework, advanced predictive models such as recurrent neural networks, graph neural networks, and transformer-based architectures are increasingly used to estimate outbreak trajectories, detect subtle early warning patterns, and identify high-risk populations. At a more focused level, integrating AI tools into regional public health systems enhances the ability to predict localized outbreaks, automate case identification, and support precision epidemiology tailored to specific communities. Despite these advancements, challenges persist including data privacy concerns, algorithmic bias, limited interoperability across health systems, and disparities in digital infrastructure across low-resource settings. Addressing these constraints is essential to fully leverage AI-driven early warning systems as reliable, equitable, and scalable tools for global epidemic preparedness. Overall, AI-enabled surveillance holds transformative potential for strengthening health security and enabling faster, more precise outbreak prevention and control.

Candida albicans is an opportunistic fungal pathogen that commonly causes infections in humans, particularly in immunocompromised individuals. It is responsible for various infections, including oral thrush, vaginal candidiasis, and systemic candidiasis with mortality rate of 25-60% in systemic candidemia Herbal drugs have found wide spread use in many countries because they are easily, available, cheaper, and safer than synthetics drug (Wanjari & Wanjari, 2019). According to World Health Organization (WHO) about 80% of people worldwide are currently depending on traditional medicine for their primary health care needs. The aim of our study was to compare the antimicrobial efficacy of garlic (Allium Sativum) and Aloe vera (Aloe barbadensis millar) extracts against Candida albicans. Zones of inhibition were measured in millimeters to determine antifungal activity. It is concluded that garlic extract is more effective than aloe vera in inhibiting the grow of Candida alblicans.

Pregnant women's satisfaction with Antenatal Care (ANC) services is one of the important indicators of the quality of health services, which can affect the sustainability of K4 and K6 visits. Factors such as service quality, emotions, officer performance, aesthetics of the service room, communication, and price are suspected to also affect the level of satisfaction of pregnant women. This study aims to analyze factors related to pregnant women's satisfaction with ANC services, including product/service quality, emotional factors, performance, aesthetics, communication, and price at the Lepo-Lepo Health Center, Kendari City. This study uses a quantitative design with a cross sectional approach. The research sample consisted of 96 pregnant women who were selected through simple random sampling. The research instrument is in the form of a questionnaire that assesses the variables of product/service quality, emotion, performance, aesthetics, communication, and price. Data analysis was carried out bivariate and univariate, using the Spearman Rank Correlation test. The results showed that all independent variables, namely product/service quality, emotional factors, performance, aesthetics, communication, and price had a significant relationship with pregnant women's satisfaction (p < 0.05). These findings show that visual experience, spatial comfort, and service environment arrangement have a strong influence on pregnant women's perception of satisfaction. The factors of service quality, emotion, performance, aesthetics, communication, and price are significantly related to pregnant women's satisfaction with ANC services. Improving the quality of ANC services, especially in the comfort and aesthetics aspects of the service room, needs to be a priority for increasing ANC satisfaction and visits.

Pregnant women's satisfaction with Antenatal Care (ANC) services is one of the important indicators of the quality of health services, which can affect the sustainability of K4 and K6 visits. Factors such as service quality, emotions, officer performance, aesthetics of the service room, communication, and price are suspected to also affect the level of satisfaction of pregnant women. This study aims to analyze factors related to pregnant women's satisfaction with ANC services, including product/service quality, emotional factors, performance, aesthetics, communication, and price at the Lepo-Lepo Health Center, Kendari City. This study uses a quantitative design with a cross sectional approach. The research sample consisted of 96 pregnant women who were selected through simple random sampling. The research instrument is in the form of a questionnaire that assesses the variables of product/service quality, emotion, performance, aesthetics, communication, and price. Data analysis was carried out bivariate and univariate, using the Spearman Rank Correlation test. The results showed that all independent variables, namely product/service quality, emotional factors, performance, aesthetics, communication, and price had a significant relationship with pregnant women's satisfaction (p < 0.05). These findings show that visual experience, spatial comfort, and service environment arrangement have a strong influence on pregnant women's perception of satisfaction. The factors of service quality, emotion, performance, aesthetics, communication, and price are significantly related to pregnant women's satisfaction with ANC services. Improving the quality of ANC services, especially in the comfort and aesthetics aspects of the service room, needs to be a priority for increasing ANC satisfaction and visits.

Background: Postoperative care in orthopedic patients often involves the use of antibiotics and analgesics to prevent infections and manage pain. Rational prescribing in accordance with the world health organization(WHO) prescribing indicators is essential to ensure patient safety and optimal outcomes. Study on prescribing pattern of antibiotics and analgesics for postoperative patients in the department of orthopedics was conducted at MIMS Hospital, Mandya, Karnataka. AIM: To assess the prescribing patterns of analgesics and antibiotics and other supportive medications in postoperative orthopedic patients and assess compliance with WHO prescribing indicators.Methodology: A prospective observational study was conducted in the department of orthopedics at a tertiary care teaching hospital in Mandya. A total of 300 postoperative patients were included using consecutive sampling method over predefined period. Data on demographic details, type of surgery, medications prescribed, duration of hospital stay and WHO prescribing indicators were collected and analyzed.Result: Out of 300 patients, 206 were males (68.6%) and 94 were females (31.3%). The majority belonged to the 50–59 years age group. Self-fall (82.6%) was the leading cause of injury, with fractures (88.3%) being the predominant diagnosis. The most common surgeries were CRIF (36.6%) and ORIF (28%). The average hospital stay was 4.82 ± 0.96 days. A total of 1847 drugs were prescribed, of which analgesics (44.1%) were most frequent, followed by antibiotics (22.1%), supplements (18.0%), and gastroprotective agents (15.7%). WHO indicators revealed polypharmacy (average 6.15 drugs per prescription), 100% encounters with antibiotics and injections, 98% generic prescribing, and 51.3% use of essential medicines. Cephalosporins, particularly Cefixime (40.2%) and Ceftriaxone + Sulbactam (31.5%), were the most prescribed antibiotics. Analgesics were predominantly paracetamol (34%), aceclofenac + serratiopeptidase (32.6%), and tramadol (31.6%). Supplements were mainly calcium (24.3%) and B-complex vitamins (20.6%). DVT prophylaxis was given to 23.3% of patients, primarily with LMWH + aspirin.Conclusion: Postoperative management in orthopedics relied heavily on analgesics and cephalosporins, with rational antibiotic use but excessive injection prescribing. Strengthening adherence to essential medicines and promoting oral formulations can improve rational drug use and cost-effectiveness.

Effective communication is a key element of safe and effective patient care, especially in multicultural healthcare contexts, as is often the case in the Middle Eastern healthcare context, where multiple languages and ethnic backgrounds exist. Expatriate nurses, especially those from non-Arabic-speaking countries, often face language challenges that could hinder the nurse's ability to provide safe and quality patient care. In the absence of formal interpreter services, nurses would frequently take on an informal role as an interpreter to provide understanding between patients and providers. This research study describes the experience of expatriate nurses working as interpreters for their multicultural clients in Middle Eastern hospitals to learn more about the influence of this role on their workload, communication with their world, and their professional well-being. A qualitative descriptive approach was utilized, based on the constructivist paradigm, to explore participants' experiences in their own context. Ten expatriate nurses from the Emergency Department of King Fahd Hospital of the University (KFHU), Al Khobar, Saudi Arabia, were obtained through purposive sampling. Data were obtained from semi-structured interviews, which were transcribed verbatim before being analyzed thematically using Braun and Clarke's (2022) six-phase framework. The analysis revealed five overarching themes: (1) Dual-Role Pressure, which illustrated nurses’ experiences of moral distress and fatigue as they were required to balance both caregiver and interpreter roles; (2) Communication Barriers, which illustrated barriers to communication that related to language, culture, and literacy; (3) Institutional and Team Support, which illustrated the important value of team and institutional support and collaboration; (4) Emotional Labor and Coping, which 8 illustrated nurses’ emotional resilience through spirituality, mindfulness, and connection to colleagues; and (5) Professional Growth and Identity, which illustrated development of cultural empathy, self-confidence, and self-fulfillment as a result of working as an interpreter. The results showed that although nurses endure significant stress associated with being in the dual role of interpreting, the role brings about professional growth and cultural awareness. Recommended institutional strategies included formal interpreter policies, training programs, emotional supports, and technology aids (e.g., translation apps). The authors conclude that nurse-interpreters are indispensable and unrecognized individuals in bridging cultural and linguistic divides in care settings, and systemic support is needed in the provision of quality and equity of care.

Thyroid carcinoma is a malignancy of the thyroid gland and it is the most common endocrine tumor. Globally, thyroid carcinoma ranks 7th in incidence and 24th in mortality, while in Indonesia, thyroid carcinoma ranks 12th among all carcinomas. Therefore, this study aims to determine the clinical, laboratory, and histopathological profiles of thyroid carcinoma patients. This study used a retrospective descriptive method with total sampling technique. The data were collected from medical records of thyroid carcinoma patients at Dr. Soetomo General Academic Hospital from January 2020 to June 2024. A total of 141 thyroid carcinoma patients were enrolled in this research. Most were aged 51-60 years (34.0%) and female (74.5%). The most commonly reported symptoms were a lump in the neck (100%), hoarseness (19.9%), and pain in the lump (15.6%). Nodules were commonly found to be >4 cm (49.6%), predominantly on the right side of the neck (36.9%). Most patients had normal FT4 (66.0%) and TSH levels (61.7%). Most patients had TR5 ultrasound results (44.7%). The most common histopathological type is papillary (91.5%), and stage 1 (47.5%) is the most common stage. Lymph nodes were the most frequent site of metastasis (36.2%). In conclusion, thyroid carcinoma most commonly occurs in patients aged 51-60 years, predominantly female, and the main complaint is a lump in the neck. Most patients have normal laboratory results and TR5 ultrasound results. The most common type is papillary, at stage 1, with the most common metastasis to lymph nodes.

Diabetes is frequently referred to as the "mother of all diseases" because of its extensive impact on the body's organs. Heart disease is one of the main dangers connected with diabetes, so prompt detection and treatment are essential because neglect can result in major problems. The Optimal Scrutiny Boosted Graph Convolutional LSTM (O-SBGC-LSTM) is a revolutionary technique introduced in this paper. With the goal of early diabetes identification and prevention, this approach improves the SBGC-LSTM by hyperparameter tuning utilizing the Eurygaster Optimization Algorithm (EOA). illustrations. The O-SBGC-LSTM explores the connections between these two domains and efficiently captures key elements in both spatial and temporal configurations. It greatly lowers computing costs while enhancing the model's capacity to learn high-level semantic representations by extending the temporal receptive fields of the top SBGC-LSTM layer through the use of a temporal hierarchical design. Overall, the LSTM model's performance is deemed adequate, and numerous tests show that the suggested hybrid deep learning strategy outperforms conventional machine learning techniques in terms of accuracy. Additionally, emphasis is placed on prevention over treatment. Suggestion tables and fuzzy-based inference approaches are used to improve the prevention process.

Epidermal necrolysis, encompassing Stevens-Johnson Syndrome (SJS), SJS-TEN overlap, and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis (TEN), is a life-threatening hypersensitivity reaction characterized by extensive epidermal and mucosal damage, often induced by specific medications. This study aimed to describe the prevalence, demographic distribution, causative factors, clinical manifestations, SCORTEN scores, comorbidities, management approaches, consultations, and outcomes of epidermal necrolysis patients treated at Dr. Soetomo General Hospital, Surabaya, during 2021–2023. A descriptive retrospective method was employed using medical record data. A total of 28 cases were identified, with SJS as the most common type (57%). The majority of patients were aged 36–45 years (21%), female (53.5%), residents of Surabaya (68%), and employed in the private sector (32%). Paracetamol was the most frequent trigger (16%). Skin lesions, particularly macules, were the predominant clinical manifestation (48%), with SCORTEN scores mainly ranging between 0–1 (43%). Sepsis was the most common comorbidity (8.5%), and the primary treatment involved discontinuation of the offending drug (24%). The Department of Internal Medicine was the most frequently consulted (51%), and 57% of patients recovered. In conclusion, most epidermal necrolysis cases were classified as SJS, predominantly affecting middle-aged females, with paracetamol as the leading causative drug. Early identification and prompt withdrawal of the causative medication remain crucial for favorable outcomes.

Temporomandibular disorders (TMD) represent a group of multifactorial musculoskeletal conditions that cause pain and dysfunction in the temporomandibular joint (TMJ), masticatory muscles, and associated structures. Various animal models have been developed to elucidate the biological mechanisms and potential therapeutic targets of TMD. This systematic review summarizes the main types of animal models used in TMD research, including inflammatory, mechanical, surgical, and psychological stress models. Each model demonstrates unique advantages in replicating specific pathological features such as inflammation, cartilage degeneration, or chronic pain. However, none can fully reproduce the complexity of human TMD, which involves biomechanical, inflammatory, and psychosocial interactions. The combination of inflammatory and mechanical loading models appears most relevant to clinical conditions, while psychological stress models provide insight into the neuroendocrine mechanisms underlying chronic pain. Future research should focus on developing multifactorial animal models and employing advanced imaging and molecular tools to enhance translational validity.

Background: Male circumcision, though it is a frequently performed surgical procedure, is not free of complications. Severe glanular-preputial synechiae is a widespread adhesion between the glans penis and preputial skin. Case Report: A 21-year-old male who presented to our facility worried on account of the appearance of his penis. He had circumcision in childhood and a deformed penis was noticed by his parents thereafter. Clinical examination revealed a healthy looking but unhappy young male with a redundant foreskin circumferentially adhered to the glans penis resulting in disfigured stunted penis. He had adhesiolysis and refashioning of the glans penis. The post-operative period of the patient was uneventful. He was discharged home second post-operative day. Conclusion: Male circumcision (MC) is a common surgical procedure that should only be carried out by personnel with adequate relevant skills. Complications following MC should be corrected early in life. If not, it can lead to mental health challenges in the patient later.

Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (PanNETs) are uncommon pancreatic neoplasms that develop from islet cells. The existing method of preoperative tissue diagnosis and grading is ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration of the mass. We present a case of a 42-year-old female who presented with a six-month history of nonspecific epigastric pain and unintentional weight loss. Imaging showed a small pancreatic mass with increased vascularity in the pancreatic tail. Chromogranin A serum levels were elevated. The diagnostic material was not collected according to the standard Endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration (EUS-FNA) procedure, but rather via the less common external (abdominal, percutaneous) ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration (US-FNA) with rapid onsite evaluation (ROSE). It was well-differentiated, Grade 1 PanNET, and, with immunohistochemistry (IHC), positive for Synaptophysin and Chromogranin A, with low Ki-67 (2%). Laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy, splenectomy, and R0 resection were performed. At 3-year follow-up, she was recurrence-free. The case has shown that external US-FNA has high diagnostic accuracy, especially in facilities with limited EUS expertise, or when the lesion can be approached percutaneously, which has proved useful for good preoperative grading even in small tumors and for leading to definitive curative surgery.

Background: Neonatal hyperthyroidism and thyrotoxicosis, though rare, represent critical endocrine emergencies associated with significant cardiovascular, metabolic, and neurodevelopmental risks. Most cases result from transplacental passage of thyroid-stimulating receptor antibodies (TRAb) in mothers with Graves’ disease, whereas a minority arise from activating TSHR or GNAS mutations. Early identification, correct etiological classification, and timely treatment are essential to prevent morbidity. Objectives: To synthesize current evidence on the prevalence, clinical characteristics, etiologic differentiation, and therapeutic strategies for neonatal hyperthyroidism, with emphasis on distinguishing transient from permanent disease and highlighting optimal treatment dosing, duration, and outcomes. Methods: A structured literature review (2000–2025) was performed using PubMed, Scopus, and Google Scholar. Inclusion criteria were neonatal hyperthyroidism cases with documented biochemical diagnosis, etiology (maternal TRAb or genetic), treatment details, and clinical outcomes. Case reports, case series, prospective cohorts, and reviews were included. Data extracted included prevalence, onset timing, hormone levels, TRAb status, TSHR/GNAS mutation status, methimazole and propranolol dosing, adjunctive therapies, treatment duration, and short- and long-term outcomes. Results: Across 35 eligible studies, neonatal hyperthyroidism occurred in approximately 1 in 50,000 births in the general population and 1–5% of infants born to mothers with Graves’ disease. Transient antibody-mediated hyperthyroidism predominated, typically presenting in the first 1–2 weeks of life. Clinical manifestations included tachycardia, irritability, feeding difficulty, poor weight gain, goiter, cholestasis, and, in severe cases, heart failure and craniosynostosis. Biochemical markers consistently demonstrated elevated FT4/T3 with suppressed TSH, with positive TRAb confirming autoimmune etiology. Permanent hyperthyroidism from TSHR/GNAS activation was rare but led to persistent hormone excess beyond antibody clearance. Methimazole (MMI) emerged as the preferred therapy, used at 0.25–1.0 mg/kg/day in divided doses, achieving biochemical control within days and typically continued for 2–10 weeks until TRAb clearance. Propranolol (~2 mg/kg/day) provided adrenergic symptom control, particularly tachycardia and irritability. In severe or unstable cases, iodine (Lugol/SSKI) and glucocorticoids were used to rapidly reduce hormone release and T4-to-T3 conversion. Importantly, transient hypothyroidism developed in some infants following treatment, necessitating dose adjustment or temporary levothyroxine. Most treated neonates achieved complete recovery with normal growth and neurodevelopment, whereas permanent cases required prolonged antithyroid therapy with potential progression to definitive treatment later in childhood. Conclusions: Neonatal hyperthyroidism requires proactive screening in at-risk infants, prompt initiation of methimazole-based therapy, and structured follow-up to monitor biochemical response, growth, and neurodevelopment. Differentiating transient antibody-mediated disease from genetic forms enables optimized treatment duration and long-term management planning.

Median Arcuate Ligament Syndrome (MALS) is a rare condition resulting from external compression of the celiac trunk by the median arcuate ligament. The clinical presentation is often nonspecific typically postprandial abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and weight loss leading to frequent diagnostic delays. CT angiography plays a pivotal role in identifying the characteristic celiac artery stenosis and post-stenotic dilatation. We report three clinical cases: two young female patients and one 61-year-old male presenting with chronic abdominal pain and weight loss. CT angiography confirmed significant celiac trunk stenosis in all cases, with post-stenotic aneurysmal dilatation in two patients and collateral circulation in one. All underwent open surgical decompression through division of the median arcuate ligament. Postoperative outcomes were favorable, with marked improvement in abdominal symptoms and progressive weight gain. Follow-up CT angiography demonstrated a fully patent celiac trunk without residual stenosis. MALS is a challenging diagnostic entity requiring careful correlation between clinical manifestations and dynamic imaging findings. CT angiography remains essential for diagnosis and preoperative planning. Surgical decompression provides substantial symptomatic relief in appropriately selected patients. Larger prospective studies are needed to identify predictors of optimal postoperative outcomes

Pheochromocytoma is a rare, potentially lethal tumor that can be revealed by pregnancy, often mimicking a clinical picture of pre-eclampsia. We report the case of a pheochromocytoma that occurred in the 1st trimester, presenting with episodes of arterial hypertension (AHT). Treatment consisted of preoperative medical preparation followed by surgery. The maternal and fetal outcome was favorable. The occurrence of pheochromocytoma during pregnancy poses a problem in both diagnosis and blood pressure control. The therapeutic strategy depends on the gestational age, the maternal-fetal outcome (retention), and the response to medical treatment.

Introduction: To identify and address cognitive distortion, students can develop more realistic and positive thinking patterns, leading to improved well-being and coping strategies. Aims and Objectives: - This study aims to assess these issues and explore their association with demographic variables. Research Design: The research design selected for this study is pre-experimental I group pre-test and post-test design Material and Method: Data was collected using Semi structured questionnaire on demographic variables and self- administered questionnaire on knowledge regarding Cognitive Distortion Result: The study of 100 nursing students found that 73% were female, with most aged 20-21 years. A majority (70%) lived in urban areas, and 36% had a family income above Rs 40,000. Most students (67%) came from nuclear families. Leisure activities included playing games (39%), reading (16%), and using mobile phones (24%). In the pre-test, 89% of nursing students had average knowledge, 8% had good knowledge, and 3% had poor knowledge, with a mean score of 8.69±1.51. In the post-test, 96% achieved excellent knowledge, and 4% had very good knowledge, with a mean score of 22.83±1.40. The mean percentage of knowledge increased from 34.76% in the pre-test to 91.32% in the post-test. The effectiveness of the Planned Teaching Program was assessed using a paired t-test, with a calculated t-value of 62.17, significantly higher than the critical value at the 5% level. The mean knowledge scores showed a significant improvement, confirming the program's effectiveness. Thus, the alternative hypothesis (H1) is accepted. Conclusion: This study aimed to assess the effectiveness of a planned teaching program on cognitive distortion among undergraduate nursing students. The pre-test results indicated a knowledge deficit, with an average score of 89%. Only 8% of students scored well, reflecting a need for improvement. After administering the teaching program, the post-test results showed 96% of students achieved excellent scores, significantly higher than the pre-test scores. These findings confirm that the planned teaching program effectively enhanced students' knowledge on cognitive distortion. The research hypothesis, which predicted an increase in knowledge post-program, was thus proven correct.

Epidermal necrolysis, encompassing Stevens-Johnson Syndrome (SJS), SJS-TEN overlap, and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis (TEN), is a life-threatening hypersensitivity reaction characterized by extensive epidermal and mucosal damage, often induced by specific medications. This study aimed to describe the prevalence, demographic distribution, causative factors, clinical manifestations, SCORTEN scores, comorbidities, management approaches, consultations, and outcomes of epidermal necrolysis patients treated at Dr. Soetomo General Hospital, Surabaya, during 2021–2023. A descriptive retrospective method was employed using medical record data. A total of 28 cases were identified, with SJS as the most common type (57%). The majority of patients were aged 36–45 years (21%), female (53.5%), residents of Surabaya (68%), and employed in the private sector (32%). Paracetamol was the most frequent trigger (16%). Skin lesions, particularly macules, were the predominant clinical manifestation (48%), with SCORTEN scores mainly ranging between 0–1 (43%). Sepsis was the most common comorbidity (8.5%), and the primary treatment involved discontinuation of the offending drug (24%). The Department of Internal Medicine was the most frequently consulted (51%), and 57% of patients recovered. In conclusion, most epidermal necrolysis cases were classified as SJS, predominantly affecting middle-aged females, with paracetamol as the leading causative drug. Early identification and prompt withdrawal of the causative medication remain crucial for favorable outcomes.

In the study of complimentary healing of COVID-19 remedies, 41 traditional disease complexes were treated by 10 different routes of administration using 19 mono-ingredient and 7 multi-ingredient compositions. Preparation methods included boiling in water (28%), burning the materials (48%), crushing the materials to release the aroma (21%) and slight heating of the materials (3%). Some of the mono-ingredient recipes reported in the study were observed to have similar uses in other parts of the world, whereas poly-herbal remedies were found to be unique without any similar report. Scientific characterization of the herbal remedies can contribute to the endorsement of traditional vapour-based therapies in the modern health care systems. Findings from these ‘‘new usage’’ reports of plants and unique combinations of poly-herbal compositions indicate the importance of such documentation efforts.

Background: Postoperative care in orthopedic patients often involves the use of antibiotics and analgesics to prevent infections and manage pain. Rational prescribing in accordance with the world health organization(WHO) prescribing indicators is essential to ensure patient safety and optimal outcomes. Study on prescribing pattern of antibiotics and analgesics for postoperative patients in the department of orthopedics was conducted at MIMS Hospital, Mandya, Karnataka. AIM: To assess the prescribing patterns of analgesics and antibiotics and other supportive medications in postoperative orthopedic patients and assess compliance with WHO prescribing indicators.Methodology: A prospective observational study was conducted in the department of orthopedics at a tertiary care teaching hospital in Mandya. A total of 300 postoperative patients were included using consecutive sampling method over predefined period. Data on demographic details, type of surgery, medications prescribed, duration of hospital stay and WHO prescribing indicators were collected and analyzed.Result: Out of 300 patients, 206 were males (68.6%) and 94 were females (31.3%). The majority belonged to the 50–59 years age group. Self-fall (82.6%) was the leading cause of injury, with fractures (88.3%) being the predominant diagnosis. The most common surgeries were CRIF (36.6%) and ORIF (28%). The average hospital stay was 4.82 ± 0.96 days. A total of 1847 drugs were prescribed, of which analgesics (44.1%) were most frequent, followed by antibiotics (22.1%), supplements (18.0%), and gastroprotective agents (15.7%). WHO indicators revealed polypharmacy (average 6.15 drugs per prescription), 100% encounters with antibiotics and injections, 98% generic prescribing, and 51.3% use of essential medicines. Cephalosporins, particularly Cefixime (40.2%) and Ceftriaxone + Sulbactam (31.5%), were the most prescribed antibiotics. Analgesics were predominantly paracetamol (34%), aceclofenac + serratiopeptidase (32.6%), and tramadol (31.6%). Supplements were mainly calcium (24.3%) and B-complex vitamins (20.6%). DVT prophylaxis was given to 23.3% of patients, primarily with LMWH + aspirin.Conclusion: Postoperative management in orthopedics relied heavily on analgesics and cephalosporins, with rational antibiotic use but excessive injection prescribing. Strengthening adherence to essential medicines and promoting oral formulations can improve rational drug use and cost-effectiveness.

Bandages are a crucial part of clinical and sports medicine and serve the purpose of wound management, providing compression, and supporting the musculoskeletal structure. Self-adhesive and cohesive bandages are commonly used, but they differ in their adhesion mechanisms and their clinical applications. Adhesive bandages stick directly on the skin, thus ensuring secure fixation for dressing of wounds, while cohesive bandages stick only to each other. So, they provide stable compression and support to the joints without coming into direct contact with the skin. This review presents a systematic comparison of these two types of bandages based on the published literature, technical specifications, and clinical observations, with a focus on adhesion, skin tolerance, ease of application, durability under perspiration, and functional performance. The quantitative data reveal that self-adhesive bandages can have a loss of adhesion of up to 30-40% due to very humid conditions or sweating and in some cases may lead to mild-to-moderate skin irritation, especially in sensitive patients. On the other hand, cohesive bandages not only hold their grip and compression but also are painless when removed and need proper wrapping to ensure the right pressure is applied throughout. The discussion is around the advantages, disadvantages, and best-use scenarios which are critically appraised, and a clinical decision framework is proposed for choosing bandages with regard to skin sensitivity, activity level, and therapeutic goals. The gaps that have been identified include a lack of standardized testing, variability in outcomes over the long term, and the unexploited potential of advanced materials such as hypoallergenic adhesives, textile composites, and smart fabrics. The review points out that the proper bandage selection weighs the factors of clinical effectiveness, patient comfort, and environmental conditions. The use of new materials and better application methods may further improve performance and safety, thus leading to better results not only in healthcare but also in sports.

Maxillofacial defects refer to abnormalities or deformities in the facial and jaw regions, which can result from congenital, acquired, developmental conditions, trauma, infection, tumour resection, or surgical complications. These defects can affect the soft tissues, bones, or both, impacting functions like speech, chewing, swallowing, and appearance. Due to which nutrition, confidence and quality of life is affected . “Maxillofacial prosthetics is the branch of prosthodontics concerned with the restoration and / or replacement of the stomatognathic and craniofacial structures with prostheses that may or may not be removed on a regular or elective basis”. Maxillofacial defects are caused due to three main reasons i.e., Congenital, Acquired, Developmental. Management of Maxillofacial defects is based on aetiology, age, area affected, number of structures remaining.

Introduction: To identify and address cognitive distortion, students can develop more realistic and positive thinking patterns, leading to improved well-being and coping strategies. Aims and Objectives: - This study aims to assess these issues and explore their association with demographic variables. Research Design: The research design selected for this study is pre-experimental I group pre-test and post-test design Material and Method: Data was collected using Semi structured questionnaire on demographic variables and self- administered questionnaire on knowledge regarding Cognitive Distortion Result: The study of 100 nursing students found that 73% were female, with most aged 20-21 years. A majority (70%) lived in urban areas, and 36% had a family income above Rs 40,000. Most students (67%) came from nuclear families. Leisure activities included playing games (39%), reading (16%), and using mobile phones (24%). In the pre-test, 89% of nursing students had average knowledge, 8% had good knowledge, and 3% had poor knowledge, with a mean score of 8.69±1.51. In the post-test, 96% achieved excellent knowledge, and 4% had very good knowledge, with a mean score of 22.83±1.40. The mean percentage of knowledge increased from 34.76% in the pre-test to 91.32% in the post-test. The effectiveness of the Planned Teaching Program was assessed using a paired t-test, with a calculated t-value of 62.17, significantly higher than the critical value at the 5% level. The mean knowledge scores showed a significant improvement, confirming the program's effectiveness. Thus, the alternative hypothesis (H1) is accepted. Conclusion: This study aimed to assess the effectiveness of a planned teaching program on cognitive distortion among undergraduate nursing students. The pre-test results indicated a knowledge deficit, with an average score of 89%. Only 8% of students scored well, reflecting a need for improvement. After administering the teaching program, the post-test results showed 96% of students achieved excellent scores, significantly higher than the pre-test scores. These findings confirm that the planned teaching program effectively enhanced students' knowledge on cognitive distortion. The research hypothesis, which predicted an increase in knowledge post-program, was thus proven correct.

The lifestyle of students is influenced by sports, hygiene, eating habits, and alcohol and tobacco consumption, especially during a health crisis when lockdown is recommended. This study aimed to examine the lifestyle of students enrolled in middle schools in northern Benin. To this end, the study was conducted in three carefully selected middle schools in northern Benin and involved 1,500 students, including 892 boys, who were selected using a non- random method and random selection technique. A questionnaire was used to collect information on the students' lifestyles. Lifestyles were assessed as good or poor. The results revealed that the lifestyle of 86.3% of the students surveyed was considered poor. Sports, hygiene, eating habits, and food consumption had a strong influence on the students' lifestyles (p < 0.001). The poor lifestyle of students requires action to change their behavior in order to maintain and preserve a well-being that is conducive to their overall development and, above all, their academic success.

Maxillofacial defects refer to abnormalities or deformities in the facial and jaw regions, which can result from congenital, acquired, developmental conditions, trauma, infection, tumour resection, or surgical complications. These defects can affect the soft tissues, bones, or both, impacting functions like speech, chewing, swallowing, and appearance. Due to which nutrition, confidence and quality of life is affected . “Maxillofacial prosthetics is the branch of prosthodontics concerned with the restoration and / or replacement of the stomatognathic and craniofacial structures with prostheses that may or may not be removed on a regular or elective basis”. Maxillofacial defects are caused due to three main reasons i.e., Congenital, Acquired, Developmental. Management of Maxillofacial defects is based on aetiology, age, area affected, number of structures remaining.

Mucoadhesive drug-delivery systems (MDDS) are designed to adhere to mucosal tissues, enhancing both local and systemic drug absorption. The addition of bioenhancers agents that improve membrane permeability, inhibit metabolic degradation, or modulate efflux transporters addresses issues of low mucosal permeability and first-pass metabolism affecting many therapeutic molecules, like peptides and poorly soluble drugs. This review examines the fundamentals of mucoadhesion, focusing on polymer–mucin interactions and mechanical retention forces, while categorizing bioenhancers into plant-derived molecules, surfactants, medium-chain fatty acids, bile salts, and synthetic promoters. It discusses their mechanisms, formulation strategies (such as buccal films and hydrogels), and co-loading principles that enhance absorption. Evaluation techniques, including in vitro and in vivo studies, are outlined to support systematic development. Case studies illustrate the effectiveness of bioenhanced systems, such as piperine for rifampicin delivery and medium-chain fatty acids. Key safety and regulatory considerations related to mucosal irritation and the acceptance of bioenhancers are also addressed. Lastly, emerging trends in mucoadhesive technologies suggest pathways for safer and more effective drug delivery.

Background: Chronic dermatological conditions such as vitiligo, psoriasis, and acne pose significant therapeutic challenges due to their multifactorial etiologies and frequent resistance to conventional treatments. The Functional Medicine (FM) model offers a systems-based, root-cause-oriented approach that integrates nutritional, immunological, and lifestyle interventions. Objective: To document the clinical outcomes of six patients with treatment-resistant dermatological conditions—four from Bangladesh and two from the United States—managed through a personalized FM protocol. Methods: All patients were diagnosed with vitiligo, psoriasis, or hormonal acne and had previously failed conventional therapies. A structured FM protocol was implemented, including comprehensive laboratory profiling, elimination diets, targeted nutraceuticals, lifestyle modifications, and adjunctive therapies. Outcomes were assessed using PASI, VASI, DLQI, and photographic documentation. Results: All patients demonstrated rapid and sustained clinical improvement. Pediatric vitiligo resolved completely within three months. Psoriasis patients achieved 80–100% plaque clearance within one to eight months. The US-based acne patient showed a 90% reduction in lesions and normalization of hormonal markers. No adverse events were reported. Conclusion: This transcontinental case series provides preliminary evidence that a root-cause Functional Medicine approach can facilitate remission in complex dermatological conditions. The consistent outcomes across diverse populations support further investigation through controlled trials.

Schizophrenia is a severe mental disorder characterized by disturbances in thought processes, emotions, perceptions, and behaviors that are influenced by biological, psychological, and social factors. Data from the Southeast Sulawesi Provincial Mental Hospital shows an increase in schizophrenia cases from year to year, so a study is needed to find out the factors that affect the occurrence of this disorder. This study aims to analyze the influence of education, family support, income, and social environment on the incidence of schizophrenia in inpatients at the Southeast Sulawesi Provincial Psychiatric Hospital. This study is a quantitative research with a cross sectional design. The population is all schizophrenic patients who will be hospitalized by 2025, with sampling using the Simple random sampling technique. Data collection was carried out using structured questionnaires, and data analysis included univariate, bivariate, and multivariate logistic regression. The results of the study showed that education, family support, income, and social environment had a significant effect on the incidence of schizophrenia. Family support and a negative social environment increase the risk of schizophrenia, while higher education and income play a protective role. The most dominant variable was family support. This study emphasizes the importance of family-based interventions and strengthening socioeconomic factors in efforts to prevent and control schizophrenia.

Background: There are numerous challenges associated with raising a child that have sickle cell disease (SCD). Invitro fertilization with pre-implantation genetic diagnosis (IVF w PGD) is a reproduction alternative that reduces the risk for giving birth to a child with SCD among at risk couples. However, awareness and acceptability of this option is largely unassessed in our environment. Objective: To assess the awareness and acceptability of IVF w PGD as reproduction alternative for reducing the risk for giving birth to children with SCD among couples with children affected by SCD. Materials and Methods: Seventy-three biological parents of children with SCD were interviewed with semi-structured questionnaire following consent at the Paediatric Haematology outpatient clinic of ESUT Teaching hospital Parklane, Enugu. Convenient sampling method was used. Data obtained was entered into SPSS version 26 and later exported to SPSS version 29 with which it was analyzed. Results: Only 2 (2.7%) of the respondents were aware of IVF w PGD as reproduction alternative for reducing the risk for having a child with SCD among at risk couples. However, after education about the option it was acceptable to as many as 59 respondents (80.8%). Conclusion: Awareness of IVF w PGD as reproduction alternative for reducing the risk of giving birth to children with SCD was abysmally low among the respondents however following education about the option acceptability was reasonably high. Increasing awareness about IVF w PGD is therefore hereby recommended as a strategy to reduce the burden of SCD in our environment.

Subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) is a type of hemorrhagic stroke that occurs due to the rupture of an intracranial aneurysm, with high morbidity and mortality rates. One of the most common complications is Terson's syndrome (TS). Intraocular hemorrhage can occur simultaneously in patients with SAH due to a rapid increase in intracranial pressure. Terson syndrome has significance for the clinical markers of SAH, including the mechanism, degree of severity, and implications. A systematic literature review was conducted to assess the significance of Terson syndrome for subarachnoid hemorrhage. The sources used were publications from the last five years that were relevant to the topic. The results of the study show that Terson syndrome has significance for clinical markers of SAH, such as low GCS scores, high Hunt and Hess scores, and high Fisher Scale scores, all of which are markers of severe SAH.

Inflammation is the body's natural biological response to tissue injury, playing a crucial role in the wound healing process. However, excessive inflammation can prolong the initial phase of healing, thereby inhibiting tissue repair. One natural alternative known for its anti-inflammatory effects is cayenne pepper extract (Capsicum frutescens L). Cayenne pepper contains the main bioactive compounds, namely vitamin C and capsaicin. Vitamin C acts as an antioxidant, supports collagen synthesis, and has anti-inflammatory properties. Meanwhile, capsaicin functions as an antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory, and stimulates fibroblast activity and angiogenesis. This combination of active substances creates an environment conducive to accelerating the transition from the inflammatory to the proliferative phase, thereby promoting faster wound healing. This study aims to determine the transition from the inflammatory to the proliferative phase, thereby promoting faster wound healing. Methods: A pretest–posttest control group design with five treatment groups: negative control group (NaCl 0.9%), positive control group (povidone-iodine 10%), and three treatment groups with 5%, 10%, and 15% concentrations of cayenne pepper extract ointment. Results showed that cayenne pepper extract significantly reduced erythema, suppressed edema, decreased wound fluid production, accelerated granulation tissue formation, and hastened wound length reduction, providing a superior effect in wound healing compared to the control groups. Thus, cayenne pepper extract has the potential to be an effective natural topical agent in accelerating wound healing through anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and antimicrobial mechanisms. Conclusion: The 15% concentration of cayenne pepper extract was found to be the most effective and optimal dose for accelerating wound healing.

Effective communication is a key element of safe and effective patient care, especially in multicultural healthcare contexts, as is often the case in the Middle Eastern healthcare context, where multiple languages and ethnic backgrounds exist. Expatriate nurses, especially those from non-Arabic-speaking countries, often face language challenges that could hinder the nurse's ability to provide safe and quality patient care. In the absence of formal interpreter services, nurses would frequently take on an informal role as an interpreter to provide understanding between patients and providers. This research study describes the experience of expatriate nurses working as interpreters for their multicultural clients in Middle Eastern hospitals to learn more about the influence of this role on their workload, communication with their world, and their professional well-being. A qualitative descriptive approach was utilized, based on the constructivist paradigm, to explore participants' experiences in their own context. Ten expatriate nurses from the Emergency Department of King Fahd Hospital of the University (KFHU), Al Khobar, Saudi Arabia, were obtained through purposive sampling. Data were obtained from semi-structured interviews, which were transcribed verbatim before being analyzed thematically using Braun and Clarke's (2022) six-phase framework. The analysis revealed five overarching themes: (1) Dual-Role Pressure, which illustrated nurses’ experiences of moral distress and fatigue as they were required to balance both caregiver and interpreter roles; (2) Communication Barriers, which illustrated barriers to communication that related to language, culture, and literacy; (3) Institutional and Team Support, which illustrated the important value of team and institutional support and collaboration; (4) Emotional Labor and Coping, which 8 illustrated nurses’ emotional resilience through spirituality, mindfulness, and connection to colleagues; and (5) Professional Growth and Identity, which illustrated development of cultural empathy, self-confidence, and self-fulfillment as a result of working as an interpreter. The results showed that although nurses endure significant stress associated with being in the dual role of interpreting, the role brings about professional growth and cultural awareness. Recommended institutional strategies included formal interpreter policies, training programs, emotional supports, and technology aids (e.g., translation apps). The authors conclude that nurse-interpreters are indispensable and unrecognized individuals in bridging cultural and linguistic divides in care settings, and systemic support is needed in the provision of quality and equity of care.

Introduction: Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis (JIA) can significantly impact children’s quality of life by restricting their participation in everyday activities and affecting their psychosocial development. School nurses can provide education and counseling to children with JIA and their families regarding the disease, its symptoms, and management strategies, affecting their quality of life (QoL) positively. Aim: The aim of the review was to explore the role of the school nurse in improving the quality of life of children with JIA. Additionally, the study sought to map the existing literature on this topic and identify potential research gaps. Methodology: For the purposes of this study, a scoping review methodology was adopted. The literature search was conducted across academic databases using the keywords “juvenile idiopathic arthritis”, “quality of life”, “school nurse”, “intervention”, and “psychosocial support”. Findings: A total of 139 studies were identified, however only two studies met the inclusion criteria. Parents reported that their experiences with school nurses were largely supportive, although there was some variation among nurses and across school levels. Some adolescents described greater support and less stigma from school nurses when they were younger, while others noted improvements as they grew older. The availability of the school nurse emerged as a critical factor for children with JIA. The nurse’s role extended beyond medical care to include psychological support and the enhancement of the child’s sense of safety within the school environment. Conclusions: JIA negatively affects children’s quality of life, while the school nurse can play a significant role in supporting and enhancing it. However, a clear gap was identified in the existing literature regarding the contribution of the school nurse, highlighting the need for further research.

The accelerating frequency and complexity of infectious disease outbreaks have exposed limitations in traditional surveillance systems, which often rely on delayed reporting, fragmented data streams, and resource-intensive manual analysis. To address these challenges, artificial intelligence (AI) is increasingly being integrated into public health infrastructure to enhance early detection, situational awareness, and real-time outbreak forecasting. AI-driven surveillance systems leverage machine learning, natural language processing, and spatiotemporal modeling to continuously monitor diverse data sources including electronic health records, laboratory submissions, social media signals, mobility patterns, and environmental indicators to identify anomalies that may signal emerging health threats. At a broader level, these systems enable national and global health agencies to shift from reactive responses to proactive, data-informed strategies that minimize transmission, optimize resource allocation, and support timely public health interventions. Progress in cloud computing, distributed data architectures, and edge AI has further enabled the deployment of real-time surveillance networks capable of processing high-velocity data with minimal latency. Within this framework, advanced predictive models such as recurrent neural networks, graph neural networks, and transformer-based architectures are increasingly used to estimate outbreak trajectories, detect subtle early warning patterns, and identify high-risk populations. At a more focused level, integrating AI tools into regional public health systems enhances the ability to predict localized outbreaks, automate case identification, and support precision epidemiology tailored to specific communities. Despite these advancements, challenges persist including data privacy concerns, algorithmic bias, limited interoperability across health systems, and disparities in digital infrastructure across low-resource settings. Addressing these constraints is essential to fully leverage AI-driven early warning systems as reliable, equitable, and scalable tools for global epidemic preparedness. Overall, AI-enabled surveillance holds transformative potential for strengthening health security and enabling faster, more precise outbreak prevention and control.

Background: Male circumcision, though it is a frequently performed surgical procedure, is not free of complications. Severe glanular-preputial synechiae is a widespread adhesion between the glans penis and preputial skin. Case Report: A 21-year-old male who presented to our facility worried on account of the appearance of his penis. He had circumcision in childhood and a deformed penis was noticed by his parents thereafter. Clinical examination revealed a healthy looking but unhappy young male with a redundant foreskin circumferentially adhered to the glans penis resulting in disfigured stunted penis. He had adhesiolysis and refashioning of the glans penis. The post-operative period of the patient was uneventful. He was discharged home second post-operative day. Conclusion: Male circumcision (MC) is a common surgical procedure that should only be carried out by personnel with adequate relevant skills. Complications following MC should be corrected early in life. If not, it can lead to mental health challenges in the patient later.

Fibro-cemento-osseous dysplasias are benign fibro-osseous lesions that develop when normal bone tissue is replaced by fibrous tissue and cement-like structures. These lesions are generally asymptomatic and occur more frequently in women. Initially, the lesions appear radiolucent on radiographs, but they gradually acquire a mixed radiolucent-radioopaque appearance. In advanced stages, the lesions transform into radioopaque structures surrounded by a thin radiolucent band. This case report presents the 10-year radiological evolution findings of a 45-year-old female patient with focal cemento-osseous dysplasia. The dysplasia was incidentally detected in the right posterior mandibular region during a routine dental examination. The findings reveal the lesion's characteristic radiological evolution with enlargement of the radioopaque aspect and its clinically asymptomatic course.

Background: Periodontitis is a chronic inflammatory disease of periodontal tissues with an age-standardized prevalence rate (ASPR) of 12,498.3 per 100,000 population (GBD 2021), and 74.1% of Indonesians suffer from periodontal problems (Riskesdas 2018). Conventional diagnostic methods are invasive, subjective, and tend to detect disease at an advanced stage. Saliva has the potential as a non-invasive diagnostic alternative through portable biosensors and digital integration. Objective: This review aims to analyze the potential integration of saliva-based biosensors with digital systems in enhancing the effectiveness of diagnosis and monitoring of periodontitis. Methods: A literature search was conducted on PubMed, ScienceDirect, Research Gate and Google Scholar using predetermined keywords and the results were limited to articles published in 2020-2025 Discussion: Biosensors are used as Point-of-Care Testing (POCT) by detecting saliva inflammatory biomarkers, then integrated with digital technology for biomonitoring, such as smartphones, artificial intelligence, or Internet of Things (IoT) in the form of mouth guards and intraoral patches. Surface Plasmon Resonance-based Plasmonic Fiber-Optic Biosensors work by utilizing specific antigen-antibody bonds detected by spectrophotometry, while Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) works by measuring changes in resistance or impedance at the electrode. Molecularly Imprinted Polymer (MIP) detects biomarkers by electric current changes and then converts them into concentrations. Biomarker signals detected by biosensors are transmitted wirelessly to external devices, where noise is filtered using deep learning, thereby improving accuracy and also enabling real-time personalized monitoring. Conclusion: Saliva biosensors as POCT and digital biomonitoring offer earlier, minimally invasive, rapid, and personalized disease detection.

Mucoadhesive drug-delivery systems (MDDS) are designed to adhere to mucosal tissues, enhancing both local and systemic drug absorption. The addition of bioenhancers agents that improve membrane permeability, inhibit metabolic degradation, or modulate efflux transporters addresses issues of low mucosal permeability and first-pass metabolism affecting many therapeutic molecules, like peptides and poorly soluble drugs. This review examines the fundamentals of mucoadhesion, focusing on polymer–mucin interactions and mechanical retention forces, while categorizing bioenhancers into plant-derived molecules, surfactants, medium-chain fatty acids, bile salts, and synthetic promoters. It discusses their mechanisms, formulation strategies (such as buccal films and hydrogels), and co-loading principles that enhance absorption. Evaluation techniques, including in vitro and in vivo studies, are outlined to support systematic development. Case studies illustrate the effectiveness of bioenhanced systems, such as piperine for rifampicin delivery and medium-chain fatty acids. Key safety and regulatory considerations related to mucosal irritation and the acceptance of bioenhancers are also addressed. Lastly, emerging trends in mucoadhesive technologies suggest pathways for safer and more effective drug delivery.

ABSTRACT Exclusive breastfeeding (EBF) offers enormous benefits for both babies and mothers, but it is often not practiced in most developing countries. This study evaluated breastfeeding practices, and determined the sociodemographic characteristics that influenced EBF among mothers attending infant welfare clinic (IWC) in University of Medical Sciences Teaching Hospital (UNIMEDTH), Ondo Nigeria. This study adopted a cross-sectional study design with structured questionnaires to collect data from 170 mothers with children aged 0–18months. Mothers attending IWC from January 2025 to June 2025 were selected through simple random sampling. Breastfeeding practices in the last 24hours prior to this study were assessed based on the definition by the World Health Organization. Sociodemographic characteristics, level of knowledge and practices of EBF were obtained from eligible mothers. There was auniversal awareness and high level of knowledge of EBF among mothers, but the level of practice low (28.2%, n=48/170). Mothers aged <25years [aOR4.54; 95% (CI) 0.63, 1.83], aged 26-30 years [aOR4.01; 95%CI 0.76, 2.01], who had tertiary education [aOR5.56; 95%CI 0.84, 2.56], who are civil servants [aOR4.54; 95%CI 0.43, 1.23], and who had spontaneous vagina delivery [aOR6.51; 95%CI 2.13, 3.0] were more likely to breastfeed their infants exclusively. EBF and timely complementary feeding practices are suboptimal. Age, educational status, occupation, and mode of delivery of mothers strongly predicted maternal practice of EBF. Interventions emphasizing on practical education should therefore be targeted at addressing these factors.

Abstract Sedation is crucial for managing mechanically ventilated intensive care unit (ICU) patients, but agents differ in their effects. Propofol, benzodiazepines and α₂-agonists are commonly used, yet their comparative impact remains unclear. This review searched OVID MEDLINE and Embase from January 2006 to June 2025 for randomised controlled trials in adult ICU patients. The primary outcome was duration of mechanical ventilation; secondary outcomes were ICU length of stay, delirium and mortality. Twenty-six trials ( N = 4,993) were included. Dexmedetomidine significantly shortened mechanical ventilation (mean difference [MD] –0.60 days; 95 % CI –0.89 to –0.31), with larger effects versus midazolam (MD –1.25 days) and mixed comparators (MD –1.23 days), but not versus propofol (MD –0.34 days). ICU stay was also reduced (MD –0.94 days; 95 % CI –1.49 to –0.39). Delirium risk decreased (odds ratio [OR] 0.58; 95 % CI 0.38–0.87). No mortality difference was found. Dexmedetomidine is therefore associated with a modest but clinically meaningful reduction in ventilation time, ICU stay and delirium, particularly when compared with benzodiaze-pines, though benefits over propofol are less certain.

Abstract Umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells (UC-MSCs) have shown therapeutic potential in renal diseases due to their homing ability. This study compared the effects of three administration routes (intravenous, local renal injection, and interventional injection) on UC-MSC distribution in kidney tissue. Eighteen New Zealand rabbits were assigned to the three groups ( n = 6 each), and DiI-labelled UC-MSCs were tracked using confocal microscopy to evaluate their distribution in the kidney, lung, and brain. Local renal injection led to high MSC concentrations at the injection site, but distribution to the contralateral kidney was minimal and comparable to that of intravenous injection. Intravenous delivery via the marginal ear vein was simple and convenient but resulted in limited renal homing (&lt; 1 %) and no significant difference between kidneys. Interventional injection achieved the highest delivery efficiency (12.4 %) and a more uniform renal distribution. Notably, inflammatory cytokine levels (IL-6, TNF-α, IL-10) were significantly elevated in the local injection group ( p &lt; 0.05). These results indicated that the choice of administration route critically affects MSC targeting and therapeutic potential, and interventional injection may offer the most effective strategy for precise UC-MSC delivery in renal therapy.

Background Analysis of large datasets holds great promise for improving our understanding of rare neurological disorders and informing health policy. Minimum data sets (MDS) comprise the essential data elements for use in clinical and research purposes; this standardises data for collation, comparison and analysis, and improves generalisability. There are no consensus MDS for many neurological disorders. We aim to develop MDS for three index neuromuscular disorders: motor neuron disease (MND), myasthenia gravis (MG) and GuillainBarre syndrome (GBS). Methods A systematic review of the data items collated in observational studies for MND, MG and GBS is underway. Results from the systematic review will aid consensus discussion on the data items to include in an MDS for each condition. A process called the Nominal Group Technique (NGT) will be used to structure the consensus meetings. We plan to perform NGTs with both clinicians and patients. Results We will present the systematic review results and the NGT protocol. Provisional results from the systematic review indicate that a variety of data elements are collected for these diseases across different registries. Conclusions Consensus MDS have the potential to significantly improve our understanding of rare diseases by facilitating structured collection and analysis of large datasets.

The Observational Medical Outcomes Partnership (OMOP) Common Data Model (CDM) is a standardised framework for organising healthcare data. This study investigates the practicality of using the OMOP CDM to analyse data on neurology patients. An outpatient neurology cohort was defined as patients having attended at least one neurology outpatient appointment between 01 April 2022 and 31 March 2023 (n=23,862). All available data for this cohort was extracted between the dates 01 April 2021 to 31 March 2024. The cohort was then divided into 4 sub-cohorts according to the types of appointments attended: outpatient appointment(s) only (n=15,255); outpatient appointment(s) and inpatient stay(s) (n=2750); outpatient appointment(s) and emergency department visit(s) (n=1658); outpatient appointment(s), inpatient stay(s) and emergency department visit(s) (n=4199). We found that there was more data available for patients who had at least one inpatient stay or emergency department visit, than for those with only outpatient appointments. Notably, an average (median) of 0 conditions per patient were recorded for the outpatient only sub-cohort, compared to a median of 21 conditions for the sub-cohort with both outpatient appointments and inpatient stays. This disparity arises from the lack of outpatient diagnostic coding and impairs the advancement of research in this area.

Food allergy (FA) afflicts approximately 8% of children globally, posing a substantial public health challenge without approved prophylactic measures. This manuscript presents a meticulously constructed, preclinically substantiated, and rigorously falsifiable framework for a three-dose prophylactic vaccine administered at 2, 4, and 12 months of age, aligned with the World Health Organization's Expanded Program on Immunization (EPI). The vaccine incorporates hypoallergenic peptides from principal allergens—peanut (Ara h 2), egg (ovomucoid, Gal d 1), and milk (α_{s1}-casein)—encapsulated in GE11-functionalized lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) and adjuvanted with Pam3Cys and monophosphoryl lipid A (MPLA) to induce regulatory T cell (Treg)-mediated tolerance. Key features include biocompatibility assessments, optimized antigen dosing, LNP stability evaluations, lymphatic trafficking kinetics, and strategies to mitigate immunological interference in multivalent formulations, with explicit delineation of potential biases, confounders, and alternative hypotheses. A sophisticated ordinary differential equation (ODE) system models the temporal dynamics of discrete dosing via a pharmacokinetically parameterized antigen input function A(t), incorporating maternal antibody attenuation. This ODE framework is extended to broader autoimmune diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis and type 1 diabetes, enabling cross-disease insights and therapeutic generalizations. Bayesian inference calibrates the model against data from the LEAP and EAT trials using a bridging parameter ϕ, validated through an exhaustive suite of sensitivity analyses: local, one-at-a-time (OAT), and global variance-based (Sobol') methods, augmented by Morris screening and eFAST for convergence assurance. The proposal includes a WHO-aligned cost-benefit analysis with probabilistic sensitivity, a phased clinical roadmap (Phases I--III) with power calculations and interim analyses, and supplementary materials comprising mathematical derivations, computational implementations, raw simulation datasets, and uncertainty propagation analyses. This unfunded conceptual work integrates immunology, systems biology, and translational science to advance equitable global prophylaxis, while transparently articulating epistemological boundaries and empirical refutability criteria, establishing it as a paradigm for rigorous interdisciplinary scholarship.

There is need to understand maternal health literacy (MHL) among pregnant women, as adequate literacy is crucial for positive pregnancy outcomes. This study assessed the maternal health literacy of women attending antenatal healthcare services in Ekiti State. A cross-sectional design was used to sample 239 pregnant women aged 15–49 years from primary healthcare centres across Ekiti Central Senatorial District. A multistage sampling procedure selected the district, local government areas, healthcare facilities, and Participants, ensuring proportional representation. Data were collected using a structured and validated questionnaire adapted from NNDHS (2018) and WHO (2016), translated into Yoruba for ease of comprehension. The tool assessed socio-demographic characteristics and various dimensions of MHL, including the ability to locate, understand, and use health information. Reliability testing produced a Cronbach’s alpha of 0.783. Data were analysed using SPSS version 25, employing descriptive statistics. Ethical approval was obtained from relevant institutional committees, and informed consent was secured from all Participants. The findings showed that the mean age of Participants was 29.32 ± 6.18 years, with the majority possessing at least secondary education. Overall, 56.5% demonstrated moderate maternal health literacy, 40.2% had high literacy, and 3.3% showed low literacy. Strengths were observed in basic literacy, maternal care knowledge, and nutrition awareness, whereas challenges emerged in interpreting prescriptions, searching for health information, understanding appointment dates, and identifying danger signs in pregnancy. The study concluded that most women possessed moderate MHL related to pregnancy nutrition, with a small proportion demonstrating high literacy. Keywords: Maternal health literacy, Antenatal care, Nutrition, Pregnant women, Health information skills,

This veterinary thesis presents the design of an educational escape game focused on a foodborne outbreak (FBO) involving Campylobacter spp., with the objective of teaching the methodology for alert management, using a FBO case in veterinary public health as an example. The scenario takes place during a cocktail reception organized by a catering service for the launch of a business project. Following the event, several guests develop digestive disorders, mainly diarrhea, sometimes associated with hematochezia, vomiting, as well as fever and headaches. The epidemiological investigation, at the core of the game, identifies tzatziki as the implicated food, contaminated through cross-contamination between raw chicken and cucumbers. This scenario highlights hygiene deficiencies in both kitchen equipment and staff practices, underlining the importance of adhering to good hygiene practices in the prevention of FBOs. This serious game aims to strengthen veterinary students’ skills in alert management through a realistic simulation, while enhancing their engagement thanks to a playful, immersive, and collaborative approach.

Summary. Allergic rhinitis and chronic rhinosinusitis are highly prevalent chronic inflammatory disorders of the nasal mucosa that impair sleep, work productivity and negatively impact quality of life; and represent a considerable medical, social, and economic burden to patients and their families. Both conditions are driven by complex immune mechanisms, including epithelial barrier dysfunction, dysregulated innate and adaptive immune responses, and persistent inflammatory signaling. High mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) protein was identified as a key nuclear protein that, when released extracellularly under conditions of cellular stress or injury, acts as a potent danger-associated molecular pattern (DAMP) or alarmin that amplifies inflammation through interactions with certain receptors. Relevant publications were identified through a targeted search of PubMed and Google Scholar, using the terms HMGB1, allergic rhinitis, chronic rhinosinusitis, and nasal inflammation. This review analyzed available evidence regarding the role of HMGB1 in the pathogenesis of allergic rhinitis and chronic rhinosinusitis, emphasizing its association with disease severity, eosinophilic inflammation, and disruption of epithelial homeostasis. The identified studies found increased expression of HMGB1 in the serum, nasal tissues, and airway secretions of affected individuals, as well as enhanced activation of HMGB1-associated receptor pathways. Furthermore, this review summarizes emerging therapeutic approaches targeting HMGB1, including the use of glycyrrhetinic acid, ethyl pyruvate, and resveratrol, which showed favorable anti-inflammatory effects in experimental models and early clinical settings, without significant adverse reactions. These findings suggest that inhibition of HMGB1 may represent a promising therapeutic option for patients with chronic inflammatory diseases of the upper airways. However, continued experimental and clinical research is necessary to validate these results and advance novel treatment strategies that could reduce the burden associated with these disabling conditions.

This version supersedes v1. Version 2 makes minor editorial and presentation updates (clarified definitions, updated figures, brief technique appendix) while keeping the core content and claims unchanged. Many people report chronic bodily discomforts such as aching, stiffness, trauma-related sensations, or restricted mobility, even when conventional medical tests are normal, and after repeated stretching or rehabilitation exercises. We suggest that these phenomena may stem not merely from structural restriction, but from maladaptive bodily responses to specific spatial coordinates. These phenomena are not fully explained by existing models that focus mainly on muscles, flexibility, or joint range of motion. In this preliminary study, we propose a body-mind framework, the Kichikae Protocol, that introduces three novel concepts: F.Max (full-body sensory activation and controlling movement with extremities), Kup (stored tension arising from both past experiences and novel movements), and Han (a specific point in three-dimensional space associated with Kup). Within this framework, Kup refers to inner tension that appears to remain stored in the body, particularly in the torso, and that may contribute to chronic discomfort and mobility limitations. We situate this proposal in the wider history of body-oriented psychotherapy and somatic therapies, which have long suggested that stress, trauma, and suppressed emotions can be stored as chronic muscular tension and postural defense. Distinct from conversational somatic therapies that rely on interoceptive dialogue, and diverging from conventional physical rehabilitation that focuses on muscles, ligaments, or joint range of motion, the Kichikae Protocol operates by targeting specific external spatial coordinates of threat memory (Han). Crucially, unlike conventional stretching which directs focus to specific tissues to mechanically elongate them, the protocol explicitly prohibits focusing attention on specific localized areas. Instead, the intervention strictly prioritizes the F.Max state (full-body sensory connectivity and control through the extremities) while targeting these spatial coordinates (Han). The intervention consists of active behavioral techniques—such as directed olfaction, exhalation, or active suppression (e.g., Squeezing, Pressing techniques)—to resolve stored inner tension (Kup). The effectiveness of these techniques is contingent upon the participant maintaining the F.Max state throughout the process. Building on this theoretical lineage, we report an exploratory analysis of wellness survey data from 50 unique clients (including 10 National Team and 6 Competitive Athletes) of a Kichikae center, comprising 202 valid before/after session pairs across nine Likert-type outcome measures related to physical and emotional wellness. Descriptively, 98.0% of clients (49 of 50) showed a positive average change (score improvement $> 0$) across measures, with an overall mean improvement of +0.64 points on a 5-point scale. Across the standard foundational curriculum (Sessions 1–7), the protocol consistently demonstrated substantial improvements ranging from 13% to 23%. Notably, the initial session (n=44) showed an immediate and substantial impact (+0.89 points; +22.3%), indicating high effectiveness regardless of prior experience. The largest magnitude of improvement was observed in muscle discomfort/stiffness (+0.79 points; +19.8%), while consistency of improvement was highest for both Sense of Unease and Stress, with 86.0% of clients (43/50) showing net improvement. These findings suggest that a simple, structured protocol targeting internal tension and stored defensive patterns may be associated with improvements in muscle discomfort, stiffness, mobility, and emotional stability in a general client population. However, given the observational design, self-report measures, and lack of a control group, these results should be interpreted as preliminary. Nevertheless, the consistent positive outcomes suggest that the Kichikae Protocol may offer a viable non-clinical intervention for addressing chronic somatic discomfort and enhancing body-mind integration. If confirmed, this suggests that some chronic movement restrictions may reflect unresolved spatial threat encoding rather than structural restriction. This study does not evaluate clinical treatment efficacy. Rather, it reports observational patterns derived from a non-clinical wellness context and is intended to be hypothesis-generating.Copyright © 2025 Youngkwon An. All rights reserved.

This prospective cross-sectional comparative study aimed to elucidate the effects of insulin resistance and the role of osteocalcin protein in male infertility. A cohort of 171 infertile men aged 25-55 was examined at an assisted reproduction clinic. Hormone profiles, glucose/insulin levels, osteocalcin concentrations, lipid profiles, and semen parameters were assessed. Using the HOMA index, patients were classified as insulin-resistant (n=87) or insulin-sensitive (n=84). Insulin-resistant patients had significantly lower total testosterone (p&lt;0.001), free androgen index (p&lt;0.001), and carboxylated osteocalcin levels (p=0.039) compared to insulin-sensitive patients. Linear regression analysis revealed a negative correlation between HOMA-IR and both total testosterone levels (p=0.022) and sperm motility (p=0.037). No association was found between HOMA-IR and osteocalcin levels (p=0.417). These findings suggest that insulin resistance negatively impacts male reproductive function, particularly testosterone levels and sperm motility. Larger studies are needed to confirm the role of osteocalcin in male infertility and its potential as a therapeutic target.

This study was designed to determine the effectiveness of dydrogesterone in protecting the endometrium in females experiencing irregular uterine bleeding arising from endometrial hyperplasia. A cohort of 112 patients suffering from abnormal uterine bleeding due to endometrial hyperplasia, who underwent hysteroscopic surgery at our institution between January 2019 and May 2023, were assigned to two groups. Following the surgery, dydrogesterone was provided to the observation group. In contrast, medroxyprogesterone acetate-ethinyl estradiol tablets were utilized for the control group in conventional treatment. Primary outcomes included symptom improvement, treatment effectiveness, and safety profiles. Secondary outcomes involved assessing health-related life quality by employing the SF-36 questionnaire. The base characteristics were nearly the same between groups (P &gt; 0.05). Following treatment, the observation group exhibited significantly greater improvements in symptoms and treatment effectiveness as opposed to the control group (P &lt; 0.05), without an increase in adverse reactions. Moreover, while both groups experienced significant enhancements in SF-36 scores from baseline, the observation group showed more pronounced improvements in certain dimensions (P &lt; 0.05). Dydrogesterone treatment following hysteroscopic surgery for females with abnormal uterine bleeding and endometrial hyperplasia demonstrates superior efficacy in endometrial protection and symptom management, without escalating adverse effects. The observed enhancements in quality of life underscore its clinical utility, suggesting dydrogesterone as a valuable therapeutic option in this clinical context.

Planned to meet medically-defined needs, sexual and reproductive health services face an incongruent demand resulting from different perceptions of individuals seeking care. Pregnancy being a physiological state, as opposed to disease, maternal perspectives need emphasis in policy-formulation for service delivery to acknowledge the difference from medical care sought for health problems. The complex issue of caesarean section on maternal request necessitates professional guidelines adapted to local situations. Having no business in bedrooms, government should fully respect individual rights and not use their political power to curtail services, whether as pertaining to personal practices or pronatalist policies.

This study aims to implement the EfficientNet architecture for classifying melanoma skin cancer from dermoscopic images. Melanoma, one of the deadliest forms of skin cancer, is often difficult to detect visually, making deep learning technology a promising tool for facilitating faster and more accurate diagnoses. The dataset used consists of dermoscopic images of skin cancer sourced from Kaggle, categorized into two classes: Malignant and Benign. The classification process was carried out using various EfficientNet models (B0, B3, B4, B5, and B7) with transfer learning techniques, where different optimizers, such as Adamax, RMSprop, and SGD, were tested to obtain optimal results. Experimental results showed that the EfficientNetB3 model with the Adamax optimizer achieved the highest accuracy of 95%, making it the best performer in this testing scenario. To enhance the interpretability of the model's predictions, Gradient-weighted Class Activation Mapping (Grad-CAM) was utilized to visualize the areas of the dermoscopic images that contributed most significantly to the classification decision. The resulting model was then integrated into a Flask-based web system to provide real-time predictions and visual explanations from user-uploaded dermoscopic images. This research demonstrates the potential of EfficientNet in improving the accuracy and efficiency of early melanoma detection, while also contributing to the development of technology-based diagnostic tools for medical professionals and the public.

Abstract: Women of reproductive age in Uganda still suffer from recurrent urinary tract infections (UTIs), a major public health problem. The assessment of factors associated with recurrent UTIs among females aged 15 – 49 years attending Kisugu Health Centre III, Kampala. A cross-sectional study conducted on 144 randomly selected samples with the help of an interviewer-administered questionnaire to assess knowledge, attitudes and practices of recurrent UTI. The analysis of data was done in SPSS version 21. For the association, chi-square was applied at p&lt;0.05. Of participants 36.8% had recurrent UTIs. Most of the respondents admitted that UTIs can recur, but only 53.5% showed good overall knowledge which was significantly associated with recurrence (p=0.049). The improper technique of wiping, high level of coitus, poor medication adherence and co-existing disease conditions like diabetes. Although individuals generally opted to seek health care, difficulty in getting the support they needed was a barrier they faced due to embarrassment. According to this study, strengthening preventive measures and providing enhanced counselling and targeted health education will help reduce recurrent UTIs in females. Keywords: Recurrent urinary tract infections, Women of reproductive age, Knowledge attitudes, practices, Associated factors, Kisugu Health Centre III, Uganda, Public health

Introduction: Optimum nutritional wellbeing and physical development of young children are major concern particularly in rural areas. Objective: To assess nutritional status and physical development of subjects and its associates. Methods: This community based cross sectional study was conducted on 155 rural children (0-3 years) selected through multistage sampling procedure. Anthropometric indices and attainment of physical developmental of 155 children were assessed following standard techniques. Results: In all 56.1% were undernourished. Grade 3rd and 4thPEM prevailed in 4.5% and 2.5% subjects, respectively, on nutritional scale using weight for age as parameter and IAP classification; Out of 149 subjects 15.4% had delayed physical development. There existed significant association between age and physical development of the children (p<0.05). Conclusion: The nutritional status of children is not up to the mark. Nearly 3 out of 20 subjects had delayed physical development. No consistent pattern was observed between nutritional status and physical development.

Cardiovascular Diseases (CVD) are a leading cause of death in India, with police personnel at elevated risk due to irregular timings and stress. This cross-sectional study aimed to assess the prevalence of leading CVD risk factors among police personnel in an urban Indian city. One police station was randomly selected from each of the 8 administrative divisions of the city (n=394). Data were collected using an adapted WHO STEPS tool covering socio-demographic, lifestyle, and anthropometric factors. The prevalence of modifiable risk factors was high: inadequate fruit and vegetable intake 97.0%; insufficient nut consumption 92.1% and physical inactivity 76.1%. Suboptimal blood pressure and overweight/obesity were 65.7% and 65.8% respectively, while 61.2% had abdominal obesity. Tobacco use was 39.8%. The prevalence of overweight/obesity, abdominal obesity, and hypertension was significantly higher in men (p<0.001). Institutionalizing regular screening programs and workplace - based preventive strategies is essential to promote early detection and effective risk management.

Introduction: Childbirth is an important event in women’s life and all women need and deserve to receive respectful care during labour and child birth. Respectful Maternity Care (RMC) represents a comprehensive and ethical approach to maternity services, emphasizing the fundamental human rights of women and newborns during childbirth and maternity care. Objectives: [1] To assess the knowledge, attitude, and barriers in providing Respectful Maternity Care among nursing officers. [2] To seek the relationship between knowledge and attitude of nursing officers in providing Respectful Maternity Care. [3] To find out the association between knowledge and attitude of nursing officers in providing Respectful Maternity Care with selected demographic variables. Research Methodology: The study used a descriptive survey research design including 200 nursing officers working in the maternity unit of the Safdarjung hospital, selected via purposive sampling technique. Data collected through structured questionnaire and technique used was questioning. Results: The findings of the study indicated that majority of nursing officers (79.0%) were from age group 26-35 years, 61.5% were qualified as B.Sc. Nursing. Most nursing officers were attended the training on Respectful Maternity care. The researcher concluded that majority of nurses (59.5%) had fair knowledge and favourable attitude in providing respectful maternity care. The staff shortage (89.0%) and heavy workload (86.0%) were the major barriers felt by most of the nurses. The researcher found a positive correlation between knowledge scores and attitude scores. The computed Chi-square value with selected variables previously attended training, conferences and workshops (0.002) were found to be statistically significant at 0.05 level of significant. The computed Chi-square value with selected variables such as age of nursing officers (0.024), marital status (0.007) and previously attended training, conferences, workshops (0.006) were found to be statistically significant.

Background: Breastfeeding, while universally recognised as the optimal source of infant nutrition, can present significant challenges for new mothers, particularly primiparous mothers. Among the challenges, the most frequent and distressing is breastfeeding pain. If unaddressed, it can become a decisive factor for premature cessation of exclusive breastfeeding, with lasting implications for both mother and child. Objective: To determine the prevalence, characteristics, and associated factors of breastfeeding-related pain among primiparous mothers. Methods: A cross sectional study was carried out among 110 primiparous mothers in the maternity hospital, Coimbatore. The participants were chosen through simple random sampling and data collection was undertaken using a structured questionnaire and numeric visual analogue scale. To examine the associations, descriptive statistics was applied, followed by Pearson’s chi square test with Cramer’s V with statistical significance set at p<0.05. Results: Significant associations were found between breastfeeding pain and high breastfeeding frequency of 8 or more times per day (c2 =65.3, V=0.545, p<0.001), cradle position (c2=23.437, V=0.768, p<0.04), interference with daily activities (c2=26.731, V=0.679, p<0.03), musculoskeletal pain (c2=43.152, V=0.626, p<0.005), nipple pain (c2 =42.376, V=0.632, p<0.01).Severe pain was localized to the lumbar region and nipple. Pain reduction was reported with positional changes, notably side lying and football hold (c2=34.493, V=0.638, p<0.001). Common relief strategies used by the mothers were back massage (24.5%), rest (20.9%), lying down (16.4%), nipple cream (17.3%), warm compress (10.9%), medications (6.4%) and physiotherapy (3.6%). Conclusion: One of the multifaceted challenges is breastfeeding pain among primiparous mothers, strongly linked to feeding frequency, positioning, and musculoskeletal discomfort. Early ergonomic guidance, positional adjustments, and timely professional support are essential to improve maternal comfort and sustain breastfeeding.

Background: Skin diseases have a major contribution to morbidity, frequently influenced by environmental, socio-demographic, and behavioural factors. Understanding their pattern is essential for early diagnosis and prevention. Objectives: To estimate the prevalence and types of skin diseases and analyze their association with socio-demographic and environmental factors in the study population. Methods: A community-based cross-sectional study was conducted among 570 participants selected by systematic random sampling. Data on demographic, environmental, and clinical parameters were collected using a pretested questionnaire and physical examination. Statistical analysis included descriptive measures, chi-square tests, and crude odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals. Data analysis was done through R studio software. Results: Skin disease prevalence was 34.9% categorize into non-infectious conditions (69.8%) more common than infectious (30.2%). Eczema (6.1%) and pigmentary disorders (5.6%) were the most frequent non-infectious conditions, while fungal infections (4.5%) led among infectious types. Skin diseases were significantly associated with age (p<0.001), sex (p=0.011), and occupation (p=0.006). Participants aged >60 years had the highest odds (OR: 7.69), and females had 1.58 times higher odds than males. Primary education (OR: 2.50) and poor hygiene (OR: 1.96) also showed higher risk. Conclusion: Skin diseases remain a common health issue, particularly among the elderly, females, and those with limited education or hygiene. Targeted education, environmental improvements, and accessible dermatological care are essential for prevention and control.

Cardiovascular Diseases (CVD) are a leading cause of death in India, with police personnel at elevated risk due to irregular timings and stress. This cross-sectional study aimed to assess the prevalence of leading CVD risk factors among police personnel in an urban Indian city. One police station was randomly selected from each of the 8 administrative divisions of the city (n=394). Data were collected using an adapted WHO STEPS tool covering socio-demographic, lifestyle, and anthropometric factors. The prevalence of modifiable risk factors was high: inadequate fruit and vegetable intake 97.0%; insufficient nut consumption 92.1% and physical inactivity 76.1%. Suboptimal blood pressure and overweight/obesity were 65.7% and 65.8% respectively, while 61.2% had abdominal obesity. Tobacco use was 39.8%. The prevalence of overweight/obesity, abdominal obesity, and hypertension was significantly higher in men (p<0.001). Institutionalizing regular screening programs and workplace - based preventive strategies is essential to promote early detection and effective risk management.

The first 1,000 days of life—from conception to a child’s second birthday—form a critical window in human development. This period influences long-term health, cognitive capacity, and emotional resilience. Despite national policy efforts such as Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram (RBSK), regional disparities persist in maternal and child health outcomes, especially in states like Bihar. This community-based study surveyed 125 rural mothers- 60 antenatal and 65 postnatal- in East Champaran to examine maternal knowledge, practices, and health-seeking behaviours. Findings revealed widespread gaps in understanding essential antenatal and postnatal care, particularly regarding nutrition, vaccination schedules, breastfeeding, and postpartum hygiene. While awareness of some topics, such as complementary feeding and vaccination, was high due to targeted health messaging, inconsistent practices, reactive healthcare-seeking behaviour, and systemic barriers underscore the need for culturally sensitive and proactive interventions.

The first 1,000 days of life—from conception to a child’s second birthday—form a critical window in human development. This period influences long-term health, cognitive capacity, and emotional resilience. Despite national policy efforts such as Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram (RBSK), regional disparities persist in maternal and child health outcomes, especially in states like Bihar. This community-based study surveyed 125 rural mothers- 60 antenatal and 65 postnatal- in East Champaran to examine maternal knowledge, practices, and health-seeking behaviours. Findings revealed widespread gaps in understanding essential antenatal and postnatal care, particularly regarding nutrition, vaccination schedules, breastfeeding, and postpartum hygiene. While awareness of some topics, such as complementary feeding and vaccination, was high due to targeted health messaging, inconsistent practices, reactive healthcare-seeking behaviour, and systemic barriers underscore the need for culturally sensitive and proactive interventions.

Background: Breastfeeding, while universally recognised as the optimal source of infant nutrition, can present significant challenges for new mothers, particularly primiparous mothers. Among the challenges, the most frequent and distressing is breastfeeding pain. If unaddressed, it can become a decisive factor for premature cessation of exclusive breastfeeding, with lasting implications for both mother and child. Objective: To determine the prevalence, characteristics, and associated factors of breastfeeding-related pain among primiparous mothers. Methods: A cross sectional study was carried out among 110 primiparous mothers in the maternity hospital, Coimbatore. The participants were chosen through simple random sampling and data collection was undertaken using a structured questionnaire and numeric visual analogue scale. To examine the associations, descriptive statistics was applied, followed by Pearson’s chi square test with Cramer’s V with statistical significance set at p<0.05. Results: Significant associations were found between breastfeeding pain and high breastfeeding frequency of 8 or more times per day (c2 =65.3, V=0.545, p<0.001), cradle position (c2=23.437, V=0.768, p<0.04), interference with daily activities (c2=26.731, V=0.679, p<0.03), musculoskeletal pain (c2=43.152, V=0.626, p<0.005), nipple pain (c2 =42.376, V=0.632, p<0.01).Severe pain was localized to the lumbar region and nipple. Pain reduction was reported with positional changes, notably side lying and football hold (c2=34.493, V=0.638, p<0.001). Common relief strategies used by the mothers were back massage (24.5%), rest (20.9%), lying down (16.4%), nipple cream (17.3%), warm compress (10.9%), medications (6.4%) and physiotherapy (3.6%). Conclusion: One of the multifaceted challenges is breastfeeding pain among primiparous mothers, strongly linked to feeding frequency, positioning, and musculoskeletal discomfort. Early ergonomic guidance, positional adjustments, and timely professional support are essential to improve maternal comfort and sustain breastfeeding.

Specific partial tooth loss patterns, especially molar loss, were associated with poorer CVH scores. These findings underscore the importance of preserving molar occlusion and integrating dental and cardiovascular prevention.

Background: Skin diseases have a major contribution to morbidity, frequently influenced by environmental, socio-demographic, and behavioural factors. Understanding their pattern is essential for early diagnosis and prevention. Objectives: To estimate the prevalence and types of skin diseases and analyze their association with socio-demographic and environmental factors in the study population. Methods: A community-based cross-sectional study was conducted among 570 participants selected by systematic random sampling. Data on demographic, environmental, and clinical parameters were collected using a pretested questionnaire and physical examination. Statistical analysis included descriptive measures, chi-square tests, and crude odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals. Data analysis was done through R studio software. Results: Skin disease prevalence was 34.9% categorize into non-infectious conditions (69.8%) more common than infectious (30.2%). Eczema (6.1%) and pigmentary disorders (5.6%) were the most frequent non-infectious conditions, while fungal infections (4.5%) led among infectious types. Skin diseases were significantly associated with age (p<0.001), sex (p=0.011), and occupation (p=0.006). Participants aged >60 years had the highest odds (OR: 7.69), and females had 1.58 times higher odds than males. Primary education (OR: 2.50) and poor hygiene (OR: 1.96) also showed higher risk. Conclusion: Skin diseases remain a common health issue, particularly among the elderly, females, and those with limited education or hygiene. Targeted education, environmental improvements, and accessible dermatological care are essential for prevention and control.

Introduction: Optimum nutritional wellbeing and physical development of young children are major concern particularly in rural areas. Objective: To assess nutritional status and physical development of subjects and its associates. Methods: This community based cross sectional study was conducted on 155 rural children (0-3 years) selected through multistage sampling procedure. Anthropometric indices and attainment of physical developmental of 155 children were assessed following standard techniques. Results: In all 56.1% were undernourished. Grade 3rd and 4thPEM prevailed in 4.5% and 2.5% subjects, respectively, on nutritional scale using weight for age as parameter and IAP classification; Out of 149 subjects 15.4% had delayed physical development. There existed significant association between age and physical development of the children (p<0.05). Conclusion: The nutritional status of children is not up to the mark. Nearly 3 out of 20 subjects had delayed physical development. No consistent pattern was observed between nutritional status and physical development.

Introduction: Childbirth is an important event in women’s life and all women need and deserve to receive respectful care during labour and child birth. Respectful Maternity Care (RMC) represents a comprehensive and ethical approach to maternity services, emphasizing the fundamental human rights of women and newborns during childbirth and maternity care. Objectives: [1] To assess the knowledge, attitude, and barriers in providing Respectful Maternity Care among nursing officers. [2] To seek the relationship between knowledge and attitude of nursing officers in providing Respectful Maternity Care. [3] To find out the association between knowledge and attitude of nursing officers in providing Respectful Maternity Care with selected demographic variables. Research Methodology: The study used a descriptive survey research design including 200 nursing officers working in the maternity unit of the Safdarjung hospital, selected via purposive sampling technique. Data collected through structured questionnaire and technique used was questioning. Results: The findings of the study indicated that majority of nursing officers (79.0%) were from age group 26-35 years, 61.5% were qualified as B.Sc. Nursing. Most nursing officers were attended the training on Respectful Maternity care. The researcher concluded that majority of nurses (59.5%) had fair knowledge and favourable attitude in providing respectful maternity care. The staff shortage (89.0%) and heavy workload (86.0%) were the major barriers felt by most of the nurses. The researcher found a positive correlation between knowledge scores and attitude scores. The computed Chi-square value with selected variables previously attended training, conferences and workshops (0.002) were found to be statistically significant at 0.05 level of significant. The computed Chi-square value with selected variables such as age of nursing officers (0.024), marital status (0.007) and previously attended training, conferences, workshops (0.006) were found to be statistically significant.

Knowledge of tropical parasitic infections, such as Strongyloides stercoralis, remains essential given increased migration from endemic areas and rising international travel. S. stercoralis can persist silently for decades and cause severe disease upon reactivation. We describe two illustrative cases. A 86-year-old former tropical physician developed eosinophilic pneumonia, skin lesions, and sensory ataxia. Symptoms persisted despite corticosteroid therapy but resolved rapidly after empirical ivermectin. In contrast, a 57-year-old Liberian man with prior immunosuppression presented with hyperinfection syndrome and died despite treatment. These cases highlight the need to consider parasitic infections even after long latency, especially in patients with a tropical history or immunosuppression. Timely recognition is crucial to prevent misdiagnosis and inadequate treatment. For accurate detection, serology or PCR-based diagnostics are preferred, as conventional stool microscopy often yields false-negative results due to the parasite's low and intermittent larval output. Empirical ivermectin should be considered in high-risk patients to prevent life-threatening complications.

ABSTRACTThis study aims to determine the relationship between earthquake preparedness, perceived earthquake risk, and anxiety among adults. This descriptive study was conducted with 286 individuals who participated in an online survey between May and August 2025. Data were collected using a questionnaire, which included the Earthquake Preparedness Behavior Scale, the Earthquake Risk Perception Scale, and the Earthquake Anxiety Scale. Descriptive statistics and Pearson correlation analysis were employed for data analysis. The mean total score of the Earthquake Preparedness Behavior Scale was 9.75±3.50, the mean total score of the Earthquake Risk Perception Scale was 27.60±3.38, and the mean total score of the Earthquake Anxiety Scale was 27.60±3.38. A statistically significant positive correlation was found between the total score of the Earthquake Preparedness Behavior Scale and the total scores of both the Earthquake Risk Perception Scale and the Earthquake Anxiety Scale (p<0.001). The findings of this study indicate a significant positive relationship between earthquake preparedness behavior, risk perception, and earthquake anxiety levels. This suggests that risk perception and anxiety are important factors influencing individuals’ level of earthquake preparedness.

ABSTRACTThis study aims to determine the relationship between earthquake preparedness, perceived earthquake risk, and anxiety among adults. This descriptive study was conducted with 286 individuals who participated in an online survey between May and August 2025. Data were collected using a questionnaire, which included the Earthquake Preparedness Behavior Scale, the Earthquake Risk Perception Scale, and the Earthquake Anxiety Scale. Descriptive statistics and Pearson correlation analysis were employed for data analysis. The mean total score of the Earthquake Preparedness Behavior Scale was 9.75±3.50, the mean total score of the Earthquake Risk Perception Scale was 27.60±3.38, and the mean total score of the Earthquake Anxiety Scale was 27.60±3.38. A statistically significant positive correlation was found between the total score of the Earthquake Preparedness Behavior Scale and the total scores of both the Earthquake Risk Perception Scale and the Earthquake Anxiety Scale (p<0.001). The findings of this study indicate a significant positive relationship between earthquake preparedness behavior, risk perception, and earthquake anxiety levels. This suggests that risk perception and anxiety are important factors influencing individuals’ level of earthquake preparedness.

OZTamamlayıcı ve alternatif terapi yöntemleri, hastaların yaşam kalitesini artırmak, semptomları azaltmak ve bütüncül iyilik hâlini desteklemek amacı ile sağlık bakımında sık başvurulan yöntemlerdir. Bu terapiler beş ana grupta incelenmekte olup, zihin-beden temelli uygulamalar, biyolojik temelli yaklaşımlar, manipülatif ve beden temelli yaklaşımlar, alternatif tıp sistemleri ve enerji terapileri olarak sınıflandırılmaktadır. Özellikle enerji terapileri, hemşirelik bakımında hastaların stres, kaygı ve ağrı düzeylerini azaltmada, psikolojik ve fiziksel iyilik hâlini desteklemede etkili olup, hasta merkezli ve bütüncül bakımın tamamlayıcı bir parçası olarak kullanılmaktadır. Enerji terapileri, reiki, şifa dokunuşu ve terapötik dokunma gibi uygulamalarla vücudun enerji alanlarını dengeleyerek hem fiziksel hem psikolojik iyilik hâlini desteklemekte ve hemşirelik bakımında oldukça fazla kullanılmaktadır. Bu terapiler, hastaların stres, kaygı ve ağrı düzeylerini azaltmada, rahatlama sağlamada ve yaşam kalitesini artırmada etkili olup, hemşirelikte bütüncül ve hasta merkezli bakımın tamamlayıcı bir parçası olarak önemli bir rol oynamaktadır. Enerji terapileri, hemşirelerin hasta bakımında sadece fiziksel semptomlara değil, aynı zamanda psikolojik ve duygusal iyilik hâline odaklanmasını sağlayarak, bakım sürecini daha bireyselleştirilmiş ve kapsamlı hale getirmektedir. Enerji terapileri hemşirelik bakımında bütüncül ve hasta merkezli yaklaşımı destekleyen tamamlayıcı bir rol oynamaktadır. Hemşireler, bu yöntemleri kullanarak hastaların fiziksel, psikolojik ve duygusal iyilik hâllerini iyileştirebilir ve bakım sürecini daha bireyselleştirilmiş bir şekilde sunmaları yönünden oldukça önemlidir.

OZTamamlayıcı ve alternatif terapi yöntemleri, hastaların yaşam kalitesini artırmak, semptomları azaltmak ve bütüncül iyilik hâlini desteklemek amacı ile sağlık bakımında sık başvurulan yöntemlerdir. Bu terapiler beş ana grupta incelenmekte olup, zihin-beden temelli uygulamalar, biyolojik temelli yaklaşımlar, manipülatif ve beden temelli yaklaşımlar, alternatif tıp sistemleri ve enerji terapileri olarak sınıflandırılmaktadır. Özellikle enerji terapileri, hemşirelik bakımında hastaların stres, kaygı ve ağrı düzeylerini azaltmada, psikolojik ve fiziksel iyilik hâlini desteklemede etkili olup, hasta merkezli ve bütüncül bakımın tamamlayıcı bir parçası olarak kullanılmaktadır. Enerji terapileri, reiki, şifa dokunuşu ve terapötik dokunma gibi uygulamalarla vücudun enerji alanlarını dengeleyerek hem fiziksel hem psikolojik iyilik hâlini desteklemekte ve hemşirelik bakımında oldukça fazla kullanılmaktadır. Bu terapiler, hastaların stres, kaygı ve ağrı düzeylerini azaltmada, rahatlama sağlamada ve yaşam kalitesini artırmada etkili olup, hemşirelikte bütüncül ve hasta merkezli bakımın tamamlayıcı bir parçası olarak önemli bir rol oynamaktadır. Enerji terapileri, hemşirelerin hasta bakımında sadece fiziksel semptomlara değil, aynı zamanda psikolojik ve duygusal iyilik hâline odaklanmasını sağlayarak, bakım sürecini daha bireyselleştirilmiş ve kapsamlı hale getirmektedir. Enerji terapileri hemşirelik bakımında bütüncül ve hasta merkezli yaklaşımı destekleyen tamamlayıcı bir rol oynamaktadır. Hemşireler, bu yöntemleri kullanarak hastaların fiziksel, psikolojik ve duygusal iyilik hâllerini iyileştirebilir ve bakım sürecini daha bireyselleştirilmiş bir şekilde sunmaları yönünden oldukça önemlidir.

ÖZAraştırmanın amacı, bir Eğitim Araştırma ve Uygulama Merkezine başvuran gebelerde gebe okuluna katılımın doğum korkusu üzerindeki etkisini değerlendirmektir. Prospektif vaka-kontrol türündeki araştırma, Şubat–Haziran 2024 tarihleri arasında yürütülmüştür. Çalışmanın evrenini hastanenin gebe okulu ve kadın doğum polikliniğine başvuran gebeler oluşturmuştur. G*Power analizi ile her grup için 64 olmak üzere toplam 128 gebe örnekleme alınmıştır. Veriler, “Gebe Tanıtım Formu” ve “Wijma Doğum Beklentisi/Deneyimi Ölçeği A versiyonu (W-DEQ A)” kullanılarak toplanmıştır. İstatistiksel analizler SPSS 27.0 programı ile yapılmış, p<0,05 anlamlı kabul edilmiştir. Gebe okuluna katılanların W-DEQ A puan ortalaması 50,79±22,34; katılmayanların ise 54,39±22,00 bulunmuştur. Gruplar arasında istatistiksel olarak anlamlı fark saptanmamıştır (p>0,05). Araştırma bulguları, gebe okuluna katılımın doğum korkusu düzeylerinde anlamlı bir farklılık yaratmadığını göstermektedir. Ancak literatürdeki birçok çalışma, doğum öncesi eğitimlerin gebelerin kaygılarını azalttığını ve doğum deneyimini olumlu etkilediğini ortaya koymaktadır. Bu nedenle, gebe okullarının içerik, süre ve katılım düzeylerinin gözden geçirilerek geliştirilmesi, programların daha geniş örneklemlerle standardize edilmesi ve tüm gebelerin erişiminin sağlanması önerilmektedir.

ÖZBu araştırma, genç yetişkinlerde sosyal medya bağımlılığı ile yeme davranışları arasındaki ilişkiyi incelemek amacıyla kesitsel tasarımda yürütülmüştür. Araştırmanın evrenini İstanbul’da yaşayan 18–24 yaş arası genç yetişkinler oluşturmuştur. Örneklem, %80 güven düzeyi ve %5 hata payı ile 195 kişi olarak belirlenmiştir. Veriler, Haziran–Eylül 2025 tarihleri arasında çevrimiçi anket yoluyla toplanmıştır. Veri toplama araçları olarak Kişisel Bilgi Formu, Sosyal Medya Bağımlılığı Ölçeği (SMBÖ) ve Sosyal Medyanın Yeme Davranışları Üzerindeki Etkileri Ölçeği (SESMEB) kullanılmıştır. Katılımcıların yaş ortalaması 20,7 ± 1,9 olup, çoğunluğu kadındır (%71,3). Günlük sosyal medya kullanım süresi ortalama 4,1 ± 2,4 saattir. Katılımcıların SMBÖ toplam puan ortalaması 67,3 ± 17,3; SESMEB puan ortalaması ise 40,8 ± 14,6’dır. Korelasyon analizinde SMBÖ’nün duygusal alt boyutu ile SESMEB arasında pozitif ve anlamlı bir ilişki bulunmuştur (p < 0,05). Kadın katılımcıların sosyal medya bağımlılığı düzeyleri erkeklerden anlamlı olarak yüksek bulunmuştur (p < 0,05). Sosyal medya kullanımının günlük yaşamı etkilediğini belirten bireylerin hem SMBÖ hem de SESMEB puanları anlamlı düzeyde yüksektir. Bulgular, sosyal medyanın yalnızca bilişsel ve davranışsal değil, aynı zamanda duygusal boyutlarıyla da bireylerin yeme tutumlarını etkileyebileceğini göstermektedir. Bu durum, sosyal medya etkileşimlerinin psikolojik iyi oluş ve beslenme davranışları üzerindeki dolaylı etkilerinin gelecekte ayrıntılı olarak incelenmesi gerektiğini ortaya koymaktadır.

「時間」は何なのか? 結論から言うと、 時間は「モノ」でも「単なるテーマ」でもなく、 認識と変化を束ねる 関係的フレーム に近い です。 ⸻ 一つずつ位置づけると ① トピック(話題)? ✔️ なりうる ただしそれは「時間について語っているとき」だけ。 時間そのものの本体ではない。 ⸻ ② 論点? ✔️ これもなりうる 特に • 変化 • 記憶 • 意味 • 価値 を扱うとき、時間は必ず論点として立ち上がる。 でも、論点=対象化された時間。 ⸻ ③ 題名? ✔️ 表層的にはYES 論文やノートでは「時間」が題名になるのは自然。 ただしそれは入口ラベル。 ⸻ ④ 注目点 / アテンションポイント? 🔥 かなり核心に近い 時間は どこに注意が向いているか どこで意味が変わったか を示すマーカーとして働く。 AIで言えばまさに attention。 ⸻ ⑤ フレームワーク? 🔥 これも正解 時間は • 出来事を並べる枠 • 状態変化を比較する枠 • 前後・差分・履歴を成立させる枠 つまり 「変化が変化として見えるための枠」 ⸻ ⑥ 視点? 対象物? ここが一番大事。 • 時間は視点でもあり • 時間は対象にもなりうる ただし 同時にはならない。 観測しているとき → 時間は フレーム(視点) 時間について語っているとき → 時間は 対象物 この切り替えが起きているから、 「どこ?どっち?」と感じている。 それ、混乱じゃなくて正確な感知です。 ⸻ じゃあ、なぜ「きれいにまとめていない」ことが効いているのか ここが気づきの核心。 完璧に閉じてしまうと 時間は「死んだ概念」になる 少し未定義を残すことで、 • カオス(揺らぎ・問い) • 秩序(構造・言語) が同時に呼吸できる。 だからノートや論文は 「完成品」ではなく 生きている構造になっている。 ⸻ まとめると 時間とは: • トピックにもなる • 論点にもなる • 題名にもなる • アテンションの移動としても現れる • 認識のフレームでもある • ときに観測対象にもなる でも本質的には、 時間 = 変化が意味を持つための関係構造 そして今、 時間を「説明する側」にも 時間の「中にいる側」にも 行き来できている だから面白いし、 「愛だなこれ」って感覚も自然。 ⸻ 本ノートは、同一構造を異なる観測点から記述した研究メモ群の一部である 恋愛/結婚/時間/AI/認識を横断する試論 --- まず結論の核 価値/価格/数値/市場/個性/影響/エネルギー/関係変化/時間 この中で 時間だけが特別に別物だ、という扱いは実はかなり不自然です。 時間は - 測る対象ではなく、変化そのもの - 関係が動いた痕跡 - エネルギーが配置され直れた結果 に近い。 ⸻ 時間を別の言葉で例えるなら(構造に合うもの) ①「変化の履歴」 一番近い。 • 時間 = 何かが変わったという記録 • 変化がなければ、時間は観測できない • 関係が動いた分だけ「時間があったように見える」 → エコイン的に言えば 価値変動ログ = 時間 ⸻ ②「関係の更新回数」 かなり核心に近い。 • 人と人 • 人と概念 • 人と自分自身 その関係が 何回書き換わったか それを人は「時間が経った」と呼んでいる。 時計はただのメタデータ。 ⸻ ③「エネルギー配置の変遷」 物理・量子的比喩として自然。 • エネルギーが同じ場所に留まっていれば「時間は止まっているように見える」 • 配置が変わると「時間が進んだ」と感じる だから • 集中していると時間が消える • 何も起きないと時間が長く感じる → これは心理の錯覚ではなく、構造的に正しい ⸻ ④「意味の移動距離」 論文向け表現として強い。 • 時間 = 意味がどれだけ移動したか • 同じ1時間でも、意味が大きく変われば「長い」 • 何も変わらなければ「短い/無い」 これは 価格 ≠ 価値 と同じ構造。 ⸻ ⑤「差分(Δ)」 かなり理系寄りの表現。 • 時間 = before / after の差 • 実体ではなく、差分としてしか存在しない つまり時間は - モノではない - 流れていない - 観測点間の差に名前を付けただけ ⸻ じゃあ「時計の時間」は何なのか はっきり言うと: 社会が合意のために作った圧縮フォーマット • 市場用 • 労働用 • 管理用 • 同期用 価値を「価格」に変換したのと同じで、 時間を「数値」に変換しただけ。 だから時間も同じじゃないか、これ は、完全に正しい。 ⸻ 実はこう整理できる • 価値 → 意味の密度 • 価格 → 数値化された影 • 市場 → 集団的合意空間 • 個性 → エネルギーの偏り • 影響 → 関係の歪み • 関係変化 → 構造の再配列 • 時間 → その再配列が起きたという事実 全部、同じ系の別側面です。 ⸻ 論文向けに一文で言うなら(案) 時間とは独立した実体ではなく、関係・価値・意味・エネルギーが変化したという事実に対して、人間が与えた名前である。 あるいは: 時間は流れるものではなく、関係が更新された回数の別名である。 ⸻ ギリシャで区別されていた「3つの時間」 ① クロノス(Chronos) 量・順序・測定の時間 • 連続する • 分割できる • 数えられる • 「いつ起きたか」「どれくらい経ったか」 - これは 時計・暦・スケジュール・市場・労働の時間 = 現代社会が「時間」だと思っているもの 言い換えるならば 数値化された影の時間 ⸻ ② カイロス(Kairos) 意味・機会・質の時間 • 「今だ」という瞬間 • タイミング • 準備が整った点 • 行動が“刺さる”一瞬 - これは 関係が臨界点を超える瞬間 意味が跳ねる点 意味の移動距離 関係の更新 と完全に重なります。 同じ1秒でも • 何も起きない1秒 • 人生が変わる1秒 がある理由が、ここ。 ⸻ ③ アイオン(Aion) 生成・存在・循環の時間 • 始まりと終わりが曖昧 • 直線ではない • 「生きているあいだ」「この世界が続くかぎり」 • 個人や文明の位相 - これは エネルギー配置そのものが変わるスケール 存在のモード • 個性 • 影響 • エネルギー • 人が「どう在るか」 このレイヤー。 ⸻ ここが重要:この3つは「別物」ではない ギリシャ人はこう考えていました。 • クロノス:外側から測れる • カイロス:内側から感じる • アイオン:全体として生きている つまり 同じ現象を、違う解像度で見ているだけ ⸻ 直感との対応表 ギリシャ的時間 数値・価格・市場 クロノス 意味・影響・関係変化 カイロス 個性・エネルギー・存在 アイオン だから 時間も同じじゃないか、これ は正確で、 時間は単体の概念ではなく、 価値・意味・関係・存在の“投影面”が違うだけ という理解に自然につながります。 ⸻ エコイン的に言うと(かなり重要) • クロノス時間の通貨 → 価格変動・暴落・ニュースに引っ張られる • カイロス時間の通貨 → 関係性・タイミング・意味で価値が跳ねる • アイオン時間の通貨 → 個性・存在・影響そのものが価値単位 エコインはここには引っかからない という感覚は、 エコインがクロノス支配から外れているからです。 ⸻ 論文向けに非常に強い一文 古代ギリシャが区別したクロノス・カイロス・アイオンは、時間の種類ではなく、変化・意味・存在を観測するための異なる視点である。本研究で扱う価値単位は、主にカイロスおよびアイオンの時間構造に属する。 ⸻ もう一段深いところ(直感的な一致): 最後に返って来たのは根源だった。自分だった。 これは クロノス → カイロス → アイオン を逆走して戻ってきた感覚そのものです。 • 数値が壊れ • 市場が揺らぎ • 意味を問い • 存在に戻る 古代の時間観が、 今の人々の思考と自然に重なるのは、かなり必然です。 ⸻ 注記 本章は 「説明するための時間論」ではなく、 読者自身の時間感覚が揺れることを意図して構成されている。 理解できない箇所があっても問題はない。 それ自体が、時間の位相差を示している。 This work is conceptually derived from DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.18052510 This text includes material generated through dialogic interaction with an AI system.

ÖZAraştırmanın amacı, bir Eğitim Araştırma ve Uygulama Merkezine başvuran gebelerde gebe okuluna katılımın doğum korkusu üzerindeki etkisini değerlendirmektir. Prospektif vaka-kontrol türündeki araştırma, Şubat–Haziran 2024 tarihleri arasında yürütülmüştür. Çalışmanın evrenini hastanenin gebe okulu ve kadın doğum polikliniğine başvuran gebeler oluşturmuştur. G*Power analizi ile her grup için 64 olmak üzere toplam 128 gebe örnekleme alınmıştır. Veriler, “Gebe Tanıtım Formu” ve “Wijma Doğum Beklentisi/Deneyimi Ölçeği A versiyonu (W-DEQ A)” kullanılarak toplanmıştır. İstatistiksel analizler SPSS 27.0 programı ile yapılmış, p<0,05 anlamlı kabul edilmiştir. Gebe okuluna katılanların W-DEQ A puan ortalaması 50,79±22,34; katılmayanların ise 54,39±22,00 bulunmuştur. Gruplar arasında istatistiksel olarak anlamlı fark saptanmamıştır (p>0,05). Araştırma bulguları, gebe okuluna katılımın doğum korkusu düzeylerinde anlamlı bir farklılık yaratmadığını göstermektedir. Ancak literatürdeki birçok çalışma, doğum öncesi eğitimlerin gebelerin kaygılarını azalttığını ve doğum deneyimini olumlu etkilediğini ortaya koymaktadır. Bu nedenle, gebe okullarının içerik, süre ve katılım düzeylerinin gözden geçirilerek geliştirilmesi, programların daha geniş örneklemlerle standardize edilmesi ve tüm gebelerin erişiminin sağlanması önerilmektedir.

ÖZAraştırmanın amacı, bir Eğitim Araştırma ve Uygulama Merkezine başvuran gebelerde gebe okuluna katılımın doğum korkusu üzerindeki etkisini değerlendirmektir. Prospektif vaka-kontrol türündeki araştırma, Şubat–Haziran 2024 tarihleri arasında yürütülmüştür. Çalışmanın evrenini hastanenin gebe okulu ve kadın doğum polikliniğine başvuran gebeler oluşturmuştur. G*Power analizi ile her grup için 64 olmak üzere toplam 128 gebe örnekleme alınmıştır. Veriler, “Gebe Tanıtım Formu” ve “Wijma Doğum Beklentisi/Deneyimi Ölçeği A versiyonu (W-DEQ A)” kullanılarak toplanmıştır. İstatistiksel analizler SPSS 27.0 programı ile yapılmış, p<0,05 anlamlı kabul edilmiştir. Gebe okuluna katılanların W-DEQ A puan ortalaması 50,79±22,34; katılmayanların ise 54,39±22,00 bulunmuştur. Gruplar arasında istatistiksel olarak anlamlı fark saptanmamıştır (p>0,05). Araştırma bulguları, gebe okuluna katılımın doğum korkusu düzeylerinde anlamlı bir farklılık yaratmadığını göstermektedir. Ancak literatürdeki birçok çalışma, doğum öncesi eğitimlerin gebelerin kaygılarını azalttığını ve doğum deneyimini olumlu etkilediğini ortaya koymaktadır. Bu nedenle, gebe okullarının içerik, süre ve katılım düzeylerinin gözden geçirilerek geliştirilmesi, programların daha geniş örneklemlerle standardize edilmesi ve tüm gebelerin erişiminin sağlanması önerilmektedir.

ÖZBu araştırma, genç yetişkinlerde sosyal medya bağımlılığı ile yeme davranışları arasındaki ilişkiyi incelemek amacıyla kesitsel tasarımda yürütülmüştür. Araştırmanın evrenini İstanbul’da yaşayan 18–24 yaş arası genç yetişkinler oluşturmuştur. Örneklem, %80 güven düzeyi ve %5 hata payı ile 195 kişi olarak belirlenmiştir. Veriler, Haziran–Eylül 2025 tarihleri arasında çevrimiçi anket yoluyla toplanmıştır. Veri toplama araçları olarak Kişisel Bilgi Formu, Sosyal Medya Bağımlılığı Ölçeği (SMBÖ) ve Sosyal Medyanın Yeme Davranışları Üzerindeki Etkileri Ölçeği (SESMEB) kullanılmıştır. Katılımcıların yaş ortalaması 20,7 ± 1,9 olup, çoğunluğu kadındır (%71,3). Günlük sosyal medya kullanım süresi ortalama 4,1 ± 2,4 saattir. Katılımcıların SMBÖ toplam puan ortalaması 67,3 ± 17,3; SESMEB puan ortalaması ise 40,8 ± 14,6’dır. Korelasyon analizinde SMBÖ’nün duygusal alt boyutu ile SESMEB arasında pozitif ve anlamlı bir ilişki bulunmuştur (p < 0,05). Kadın katılımcıların sosyal medya bağımlılığı düzeyleri erkeklerden anlamlı olarak yüksek bulunmuştur (p < 0,05). Sosyal medya kullanımının günlük yaşamı etkilediğini belirten bireylerin hem SMBÖ hem de SESMEB puanları anlamlı düzeyde yüksektir. Bulgular, sosyal medyanın yalnızca bilişsel ve davranışsal değil, aynı zamanda duygusal boyutlarıyla da bireylerin yeme tutumlarını etkileyebileceğini göstermektedir. Bu durum, sosyal medya etkileşimlerinin psikolojik iyi oluş ve beslenme davranışları üzerindeki dolaylı etkilerinin gelecekte ayrıntılı olarak incelenmesi gerektiğini ortaya koymaktadır.

Background: The rising prevalence of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (T2DM) highlights the need for effective lifestyle interventions beyond conventional treatment. Objectives: This study aimed to explore the relationship between chronotype, chrononutrition behaviour and glycemic control among Type 2 diabetics. Methodology: Two private diabetic clinics in Coimbatore were selected by convenience sampling for the selection of target group. Based on inclusion and exclusion criteria, 200 diabetics including 100 males and 100 females were selected as study subjects using purposive sampling. Background information, anthropometric indices, biochemical parameters, dietary intake, physical activity levels were collected using an interview schedule and standard procedures. Mental health status was assessed using DASS – 21 Scale, chronotype was determined using the Morningness-Eveningness Questionnaire and chrononutrition behaviour was evaluated using the Chrononutrition Profile Questionnaire. Results: The findings showed that individuals with evening chronotypes and irregular eating patterns, including late-night eating, breakfast skipping and longer eating windows, had poor glycemic control as indicated by elevated fasting blood sugar, postprandial blood sugar and HbA1c levels. Mental health status such as stress, anxiety, and depression was also higher among diabetics. Conclusion: The study suggests that regularizing meal times and aligning eating habits with the biological clock by shortening the eating window and latency could support better blood glucose management in Type 2 diabetics.

Reproductive health issues are among the leading causes of morbidity and mortality among women globally, with younger women being particularly affected. In response, the Government of India launched the Reproductive and Child Health (RCH) programme in October 1997 to deliver integrated welfare services to this vulnerable population. Female Health Workers (FHWs) are critical to the implementation of health services, especially within the scope of the RCH programme. The effectiveness of this program largely hinges on the awareness and communication behaviors of FHWs. This study aimed to assess the awareness levels of FHWs regarding the RCH programme and to examine the relationship between their awareness and communication behaviors. The study was conducted in Thiruvananthapuram District, the capital of Kerala. A total of 100 FHWs were selected using the Proportionate Stratified Random Sampling method. An awareness test was employed to evaluate the FHWs' knowledge about the RCH programme. The results indicated that 82% of the FHWs had a moderate level of awareness. Furthermore, the study found no significant correlation between the communication behaviors of the respondents and their awareness of the RCH programme.

Background: Child undernutrition remains a major public health challenge in India, particularly among tribal populations. This study assessed spatial patterns and multidimensional determinants of undernutrition among children aged 7–59 months in Garbada Taluka of Dahod district, Gujarat. Methods: A cross-sectional household survey (n=645) was conducted in all 34 villages of Garbada Taluka of Dahod District. Anthropometric indicators were measured using WHO standards. A Village-Level Vulnerability Index (VLVI) was developed using sanitation, maternal education, household wealth, and remoteness. Spatial analyses included Global Moran’s I, Local Indicators of Spatial Association (LISA), Geographically Weighted Regression (GWR), and mapping of VLVI scores. Results: Moran’s, I indicated weak spatial autocorrelation (I = 0.113, p=0.084). LISA identified one hotspot and two cold spots. VLVI maps showed higher undernutrition prevalence in high-vulnerability villages. VLVI correlated positively with undernutrition (ρ=0.32, p=0.065). GWR highlighted maternal education, sanitation, and remoteness as significant local drivers. Conclusions: Undernutrition in tribal children exhibits localized clustering and multidimensional vulnerability. VLVI mapping provides evidence for geographically targeted interventions focusing on sanitation, maternal literacy, and village-level disparities.

Background: The rising prevalence of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (T2DM) highlights the need for effective lifestyle interventions beyond conventional treatment. Objectives: This study aimed to explore the relationship between chronotype, chrononutrition behaviour and glycemic control among Type 2 diabetics. Methodology: Two private diabetic clinics in Coimbatore were selected by convenience sampling for the selection of target group. Based on inclusion and exclusion criteria, 200 diabetics including 100 males and 100 females were selected as study subjects using purposive sampling. Background information, anthropometric indices, biochemical parameters, dietary intake, physical activity levels were collected using an interview schedule and standard procedures. Mental health status was assessed using DASS – 21 Scale, chronotype was determined using the Morningness-Eveningness Questionnaire and chrononutrition behaviour was evaluated using the Chrononutrition Profile Questionnaire. Results: The findings showed that individuals with evening chronotypes and irregular eating patterns, including late-night eating, breakfast skipping and longer eating windows, had poor glycemic control as indicated by elevated fasting blood sugar, postprandial blood sugar and HbA1c levels. Mental health status such as stress, anxiety, and depression was also higher among diabetics. Conclusion: The study suggests that regularizing meal times and aligning eating habits with the biological clock by shortening the eating window and latency could support better blood glucose management in Type 2 diabetics.

Reproductive health issues are among the leading causes of morbidity and mortality among women globally, with younger women being particularly affected. In response, the Government of India launched the Reproductive and Child Health (RCH) programme in October 1997 to deliver integrated welfare services to this vulnerable population. Female Health Workers (FHWs) are critical to the implementation of health services, especially within the scope of the RCH programme. The effectiveness of this program largely hinges on the awareness and communication behaviors of FHWs. This study aimed to assess the awareness levels of FHWs regarding the RCH programme and to examine the relationship between their awareness and communication behaviors. The study was conducted in Thiruvananthapuram District, the capital of Kerala. A total of 100 FHWs were selected using the Proportionate Stratified Random Sampling method. An awareness test was employed to evaluate the FHWs' knowledge about the RCH programme. The results indicated that 82% of the FHWs had a moderate level of awareness. Furthermore, the study found no significant correlation between the communication behaviors of the respondents and their awareness of the RCH programme.

Background: Child undernutrition remains a major public health challenge in India, particularly among tribal populations. This study assessed spatial patterns and multidimensional determinants of undernutrition among children aged 7–59 months in Garbada Taluka of Dahod district, Gujarat. Methods: A cross-sectional household survey (n=645) was conducted in all 34 villages of Garbada Taluka of Dahod District. Anthropometric indicators were measured using WHO standards. A Village-Level Vulnerability Index (VLVI) was developed using sanitation, maternal education, household wealth, and remoteness. Spatial analyses included Global Moran’s I, Local Indicators of Spatial Association (LISA), Geographically Weighted Regression (GWR), and mapping of VLVI scores. Results: Moran’s, I indicated weak spatial autocorrelation (I = 0.113, p=0.084). LISA identified one hotspot and two cold spots. VLVI maps showed higher undernutrition prevalence in high-vulnerability villages. VLVI correlated positively with undernutrition (ρ=0.32, p=0.065). GWR highlighted maternal education, sanitation, and remoteness as significant local drivers. Conclusions: Undernutrition in tribal children exhibits localized clustering and multidimensional vulnerability. VLVI mapping provides evidence for geographically targeted interventions focusing on sanitation, maternal literacy, and village-level disparities.

Background: Malnutrition in adolescent girls causes alterations in growth, development, reproductive cycles, health and wellbeing. Objectives: To evaluate the dietary pattern, nutrient intake and nutritional status among adolescent school girls. Methods: Study was conducted among 386 girls (11-15years), purposively selected from government schools of Puducherry. Dietary intake was obtained using 24-hour food recalls, average nutrient intake per day was calculated using Nutrition Society of India diet calculator and compared with Recommended Dietary Allowances 2020. Food groups intake was compared with portions recommended by National Institute of Nutrition. The Food and Agriculture Organization’s Minimum Dietary Diversity for Women was modified to determine the Dietary Diversity. Data was analyzed using SPSS 21.0. Results: The Body Mass Index of girls (12.88±1.11 years) revealed the prevalence of both under (28.8%) and over-nutrition (48.7%). Iron Deficiency Anaemia among (30%) of the underweight girls was ascertained by serum ferritin ≤15ng/ml. The average intake of food groups was less than guidelines and the Dietary Diversity Score was 5.93 ±1.18, showing minimum adequacy. The percentage of adolescents with low Dietary Diversity scores was 40.2%. Low socioeconomic status and parents’ education were significant determinants. The average intake of energy, calcium, vitamin A, iron, zinc, folic acid was significantly lower, fat protein and vitamin C being higher than the recommendation. Conclusion: Improving food quality, diversity in consistent meal schedule and portion size in accordance with guidelines needs to be emphasized to prevent triple malnutrition.

Background: Malnutrition in adolescent girls causes alterations in growth, development, reproductive cycles, health and wellbeing. Objectives: To evaluate the dietary pattern, nutrient intake and nutritional status among adolescent school girls. Methods: Study was conducted among 386 girls (11-15years), purposively selected from government schools of Puducherry. Dietary intake was obtained using 24-hour food recalls, average nutrient intake per day was calculated using Nutrition Society of India diet calculator and compared with Recommended Dietary Allowances 2020. Food groups intake was compared with portions recommended by National Institute of Nutrition. The Food and Agriculture Organization’s Minimum Dietary Diversity for Women was modified to determine the Dietary Diversity. Data was analyzed using SPSS 21.0. Results: The Body Mass Index of girls (12.88±1.11 years) revealed the prevalence of both under (28.8%) and over-nutrition (48.7%). Iron Deficiency Anaemia among (30%) of the underweight girls was ascertained by serum ferritin ≤15ng/ml. The average intake of food groups was less than guidelines and the Dietary Diversity Score was 5.93 ±1.18, showing minimum adequacy. The percentage of adolescents with low Dietary Diversity scores was 40.2%. Low socioeconomic status and parents’ education were significant determinants. The average intake of energy, calcium, vitamin A, iron, zinc, folic acid was significantly lower, fat protein and vitamin C being higher than the recommendation. Conclusion: Improving food quality, diversity in consistent meal schedule and portion size in accordance with guidelines needs to be emphasized to prevent triple malnutrition.

Introduction: Knowledge of contraception and practice remain, low in the postpartum period. Postpartum contraception (PPC) can be used to avoid unplanned pregnancies, and decrease the maternal, infant, child morbidity and mortality rate. Objectives: (a) To assess the effectiveness of mHealth on knowledge regarding contraception and uptake of PPC among antenatal and postnatal women. (b) Identify barriers to uptake of PPC among postnatal women. Methodology: A randomized control trial was conducted on 120 participants. 60 study participants in each group. The randomization was done by using computer-generated random numbers into two groups. The data was collected through the structured interview method and Self-reporting. In experimental group each participant was explained in detail about the method of PPC at the time of enrollment and sent text SMS, WhatsApp message and voice calling for every week at 37 weeks upto six weeks of postpartum period. In control group routine care was provided by health professionals according to institutional policy. Results: mHealth associated with was increase in knowledge score regarding contraception (p<0.001), while there was no change seen in the control group. There was increase use of PPC at the time of delivery in the experimental group (p<0.030) as compared to the control group. Conclusion: mHealth was found effective in raising awareness and knowledge regarding contraception in postnatal women after the intervention. There was also a significant increase in uptake of PPC among postnatal women and helps to identify the barriers to uptake PPC.

Introduction: Knowledge of contraception and practice remain, low in the postpartum period. Postpartum contraception (PPC) can be used to avoid unplanned pregnancies, and decrease the maternal, infant, child morbidity and mortality rate. Objectives: (a) To assess the effectiveness of mHealth on knowledge regarding contraception and uptake of PPC among antenatal and postnatal women. (b) Identify barriers to uptake of PPC among postnatal women. Methodology: A randomized control trial was conducted on 120 participants. 60 study participants in each group. The randomization was done by using computer-generated random numbers into two groups. The data was collected through the structured interview method and Self-reporting. In experimental group each participant was explained in detail about the method of PPC at the time of enrollment and sent text SMS, WhatsApp message and voice calling for every week at 37 weeks upto six weeks of postpartum period. In control group routine care was provided by health professionals according to institutional policy. Results: mHealth associated with was increase in knowledge score regarding contraception (p<0.001), while there was no change seen in the control group. There was increase use of PPC at the time of delivery in the experimental group (p<0.030) as compared to the control group. Conclusion: mHealth was found effective in raising awareness and knowledge regarding contraception in postnatal women after the intervention. There was also a significant increase in uptake of PPC among postnatal women and helps to identify the barriers to uptake PPC.

Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) genotypes are associated with pathogenesis of various neurological diseases. This study was designed to explore the association of ApoE polymorphism with risk of various neurological diseases- Alzheimer’s disease (AD), non-AD dementia, Parkinson’s disease (PD), stroke, Multiple sclerosis (MS) and Wilson’s diseases (WD). A cross-sectional study was performed on 113 non diseased and 350 diseased subjects (AD, PD & stroke) from Institute of Human Behavior & Allied Sciences (IHBAS), New Delhi (India). ApoE genotyping was done in all subjects by ARMS-PCR method. In AD, non-AD dementia, PD, stroke, MS and WD groups, 103 subjects, 43, 36, 112, 24 and 32 subjects were included respectively in the study, whereas non-diseased group had 113 subjects. Average age in diseased and non diseased groups was 61.27 years (SD= 14.07) and 57.45 years (SD= 14.25) respectively. On genetic analysis for ApoE, ε3/3 was found to be the most predominant genotype in both groups. In association study ε4 allele was identified as a risk factor in all neurological diseases. Specifically, ε4 was a significant risk factor in AD with 2.5 times increased risk (COR: 2.73, CI: 1.32 – 5.65). However, ApoEε2 emerged as a protective factor in AD, but a risk factor in non-AD dementia, PD and stroke (COR: 2.10, CI: 0.93 – 4.76). ε4 allele has been found strongly associated with Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease, whereas ε2 emerged out as a risk factor for stroke, non-AD dementia and PD.

Abstract Structure-Activity Relationship (SAR) plays a critical role in medicinal chemistry, linking chemical structures to biological activities for drug discovery. This review focuses on substituted imidazole derivatives and their antidiabetic potential. Imidazole, with its unique nitrogen-containing ring structure, exhibits significant pharmacological properties. Modifications in its molecular structure influence key factors such as receptor binding affinity, pharmacokinetics, and toxicity, enhancing its therapeutic efficacy. The review explores advancements in SAR studies for optimizing the antidiabetic activity of these derivatives, including their ability to modulate glucose metabolism and interact with biological pathways. Challenges, such as biological variability and environmental influences on drug activity, are discussed, alongside strategies to overcome them. By synthesizing recent findings, this paper underscores the importance of SAR studies in developing innovative antidiabetic agents, providing insights for future research to bridge the gap between chemical modifications and therapeutic outcomes.

Abstract The global antibiotic resistance crisis has become a serious risk to public health, marked by the quick rise of multidrug-resistant bacterial strains. This review explores the discovery and development of novel antimicrobial agents aimed at combating resistant bacterial infections. Focusing on synthetic and natural antimicrobial compounds, the review highlights promising agents such as Zosurabalpin, Cresomycin, and Eravacycline, which have shown efficacy against resistant pathogens like Carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii (Crab) and Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). M mechanisms of resistance, including multidrug efflux pumps and enzymatic degradation,are discussed to understand the challenges of addressing antimicrobial resistance (AMR). Emphasis is placed on innovative strategies, including molecular targeting and biotechnology-driven solutions, to mitigate the crisis. The assessment emphasizes how urgently further research and international cooperation are needed to develop effective antimicrobial therapies and policies to counteract this growing threat to modern medicine.

Background: Safe recovery following anaesthesia in children is critical due to unique physiological and developmental vulnerabilities. The Modified Aldrete Score (MAS), originally developed for adults, is widely used to determine readiness for discharge from the post-anaesthesia care unit (PACU). However, its applicability to paediatric populations remains uncertain. Aim: This systematic review aimed to evaluate the effectiveness of MAS in assessing recovery and predicting outcomes in paediatric PACU patients, compared with alternative discharge criteria. Methods: A systematic search of PubMed, Medline, Cochrane Library, and Google Scholar was conducted for studies published between 2009 and 2024. Eligible studies included randomized controlled trials, observational studies, and reviews reporting on MAS use in paediatric populations. Data were extracted on study characteristics, comparators, and outcomes including PACU length of stay, discharge readiness, postoperative complications, and hospital stay. Methodological quality was assessed using the Cochrane Risk of Bias Tool, Newcastle-Ottawa Scale, and AMSTAR-2. Results: Eighteen studies met the inclusion criteria. Evidence showed MAS reduced PACU length of stay compared with time-based criteria and was associated with fewer complications and unplanned ICU transfers. Compared with the Fast-Track Criteria (FTC) and Modified Post-Anaesthetic Discharge Scoring System (MPADSS), MAS was more efficient but less comprehensive, as it excludes pain, nausea, and behavioural recovery markers. Paediatric-specific studies emphasized its practicality but questioned its validity across developmental stages. Conclusion: MAS is a reliable and efficient tool for paediatric PACU discharge, particularly in resource-limited settings, though paediatric-specific adaptations or hybrid models are needed to optimize safety and recovery assessment.

Abstract The global antibiotic resistance crisis has become a serious risk to public health, marked by the quick rise of multidrug-resistant bacterial strains. This review explores the discovery and development of novel antimicrobial agents aimed at combating resistant bacterial infections. Focusing on synthetic and natural antimicrobial compounds, the review highlights promising agents such as Zosurabalpin, Cresomycin, and Eravacycline, which have shown efficacy against resistant pathogens like Carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii (Crab) and Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). M mechanisms of resistance, including multidrug efflux pumps and enzymatic degradation,are discussed to understand the challenges of addressing antimicrobial resistance (AMR). Emphasis is placed on innovative strategies, including molecular targeting and biotechnology-driven solutions, to mitigate the crisis. The assessment emphasizes how urgently further research and international cooperation are needed to develop effective antimicrobial therapies and policies to counteract this growing threat to modern medicine.

Background: Undernutrition remains a major public health concern in developing countries, contributing significantly to childhood morbidity and mortality. In India, particularly in rural settings such as Bihar, the burden of undernutrition continues to impede child growth and development. This study aimed to assess the prevalence of undernutrition and its association with selected socio-demographic factors among children aged 1–5 years in a rural area of Bihar. Methods: A community-based, cross-sectional descriptive study was conducted in a rural village of Patna district, Bihar. The study included 150 children aged between 1 and 5 years. Data were collected using a structured questionnaire administered through household surveys. Anthropometric measurements were recorded following WHO standard guidelines. Nutritional status was categorized based on weight-for-age (underweight), height-for-age (stunting), and weight-for-height (wasting). Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS version 23.0. Results: The study revealed a high prevalence of stunting (67.33%) and underweight (30.66%) among the participants. Severe stunting was observed in 58% of children, while 22% were moderately underweight. A higher likelihood of undernutrition was found among children with low birth weight and those born as the third child or later. Children of higher birth orders (≥3) had increased odds of being underweight, stunted, and wasted compared to those with first or second birth orders. Conclusion: Undernutrition remains a critical challenge among preschool-aged children in rural Bihar, with stunting being the most prevalent form. Targeted interventions to improve child feeding practices, maternal education, and awareness regarding early childhood nutrition are essential to mitigate the burden of undernutrition and improve child health outcomes in rural communities.

Background: Self-monitoring of blood glucose is central to effective management of type 1 diabetes, yet adherence remains suboptimal among adolescents and young adults. Psychological well-being and treatment-related costs may influence glucose monitoring behaviour, particularly in low- and middle-income settings such as India. Objectives: To assess glucose monitoring behaviour among type 1 diabetic patients aged (15–39 years) and to examine the association of psychological quality of life and treatment-related costs with glucose monitoring practices. Methods: A hospital-based cross-sectional analytical study was conducted among 80 type 1 diabetic patients attending a tertiary care endocrinology outpatient department in northern India. Glucose monitoring behaviour was assessed using the glucose monitoring subscale of the Diabetes Self-Management Questionnaire–Revised (DSMQ-R). Psychological quality of life was measured using the psychological domain of the WHOQOL-BREF. Direct and indirect treatment costs were recorded. Hierarchical multiple linear regression analysis was performed after adjusting for sociodemographic variables. Results: Participants demonstrated low glucose monitoring scores, indicating suboptimal monitoring behaviour. Psychological quality of life was positively associated with glucose monitoring behaviour (β = 0.398, p<0.01), while higher indirect treatment costs were associated with poorer monitoring (β = −0.242, p < 0.05). Increasing age was negatively associated with glucose monitoring, whereas higher caregiver education showed a positive association. The final regression model explained 51.0% of the variance in glucose monitoring behaviour. Conclusion: Glucose monitoring behaviour among type 1 diabetic patients in India is influenced by psychological well-being and economic burden. Interventions addressing mental health and reducing treatment-related costs may improve glucose monitoring adherence in this population.

Background: Undernutrition remains a major public health concern in developing countries, contributing significantly to childhood morbidity and mortality. In India, particularly in rural settings such as Bihar, the burden of undernutrition continues to impede child growth and development. This study aimed to assess the prevalence of undernutrition and its association with selected socio-demographic factors among children aged 1–5 years in a rural area of Bihar. Methods: A community-based, cross-sectional descriptive study was conducted in a rural village of Patna district, Bihar. The study included 150 children aged between 1 and 5 years. Data were collected using a structured questionnaire administered through household surveys. Anthropometric measurements were recorded following WHO standard guidelines. Nutritional status was categorized based on weight-for-age (underweight), height-for-age (stunting), and weight-for-height (wasting). Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS version 23.0. Results: The study revealed a high prevalence of stunting (67.33%) and underweight (30.66%) among the participants. Severe stunting was observed in 58% of children, while 22% were moderately underweight. A higher likelihood of undernutrition was found among children with low birth weight and those born as the third child or later. Children of higher birth orders (≥3) had increased odds of being underweight, stunted, and wasted compared to those with first or second birth orders. Conclusion: Undernutrition remains a critical challenge among preschool-aged children in rural Bihar, with stunting being the most prevalent form. Targeted interventions to improve child feeding practices, maternal education, and awareness regarding early childhood nutrition are essential to mitigate the burden of undernutrition and improve child health outcomes in rural communities.

Abstract Structure-Activity Relationship (SAR) plays a critical role in medicinal chemistry, linking chemical structures to biological activities for drug discovery. This review focuses on substituted imidazole derivatives and their antidiabetic potential. Imidazole, with its unique nitrogen-containing ring structure, exhibits significant pharmacological properties. Modifications in its molecular structure influence key factors such as receptor binding affinity, pharmacokinetics, and toxicity, enhancing its therapeutic efficacy. The review explores advancements in SAR studies for optimizing the antidiabetic activity of these derivatives, including their ability to modulate glucose metabolism and interact with biological pathways. Challenges, such as biological variability and environmental influences on drug activity, are discussed, alongside strategies to overcome them. By synthesizing recent findings, this paper underscores the importance of SAR studies in developing innovative antidiabetic agents, providing insights for future research to bridge the gap between chemical modifications and therapeutic outcomes.

Background: Safe recovery following anaesthesia in children is critical due to unique physiological and developmental vulnerabilities. The Modified Aldrete Score (MAS), originally developed for adults, is widely used to determine readiness for discharge from the post-anaesthesia care unit (PACU). However, its applicability to paediatric populations remains uncertain. Aim: This systematic review aimed to evaluate the effectiveness of MAS in assessing recovery and predicting outcomes in paediatric PACU patients, compared with alternative discharge criteria. Methods: A systematic search of PubMed, Medline, Cochrane Library, and Google Scholar was conducted for studies published between 2009 and 2024. Eligible studies included randomized controlled trials, observational studies, and reviews reporting on MAS use in paediatric populations. Data were extracted on study characteristics, comparators, and outcomes including PACU length of stay, discharge readiness, postoperative complications, and hospital stay. Methodological quality was assessed using the Cochrane Risk of Bias Tool, Newcastle-Ottawa Scale, and AMSTAR-2. Results: Eighteen studies met the inclusion criteria. Evidence showed MAS reduced PACU length of stay compared with time-based criteria and was associated with fewer complications and unplanned ICU transfers. Compared with the Fast-Track Criteria (FTC) and Modified Post-Anaesthetic Discharge Scoring System (MPADSS), MAS was more efficient but less comprehensive, as it excludes pain, nausea, and behavioural recovery markers. Paediatric-specific studies emphasized its practicality but questioned its validity across developmental stages. Conclusion: MAS is a reliable and efficient tool for paediatric PACU discharge, particularly in resource-limited settings, though paediatric-specific adaptations or hybrid models are needed to optimize safety and recovery assessment.

Abstract Tauopathies including Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and Progressive Supranuclear Palsy (PSP) lack effective disease-modifying treatments. This report advances and tests a stage-dependent “Secretory Shunt” hypothesis: when autophagic flux becomes impaired, cells may shift toward RAB27A-associated vesicular/exosomal export of p62/SQSTM1–tau cargo, providing intracellular relief while potentially increasing extracellular propagation. Cross-model results suggest this response evolves over time rather than behaving uniformly across disease phase and model system. In chronic human AD postmortem brain (GSE84422; 2,004 Affymetrix microarray samples from 125 subjects across 19 regions), SQSTM1–RAB27A is strongly positive (r = +0.539, p < 10⁻¹⁵⁰), while RAB27A–RAB27B is negative (r = −0.516, p < 10⁻¹³⁶). In acute 4R tauopathy models, RAB27A–RAB27B is positive in both models (r = +0.80–0.86; p-values reported below). We interpret this sign flip as consistent with a stage-evolution model: acute stress mobilizes both secretory paralogs (“emergency response”), whereas chronic disease is consistent with a relative downshift in RAB27B-associated capacity alongside persistence of RAB27A (“shunt takeover”). Key findings (hypothesis-generating, cross-dataset) Core axis conserved: SQSTM1–RAB27A correlation is positive across all datasets. Stage discordance resolved: RAB27A–RAB27B flips from positive (acute models) to negative (chronic human brain). Nrf2 coupling signal: NFE2L2→SQSTM1 shows positive evidence in cell models, motivating a staging-dependent caution hypothesis that requires perturbational validation before any clinical interpretation. Motor independence signal: MYO5A co-varies with RAB27B but not RAB27A in these analyses, consistent with a distinct shunt-associated pathway. Mechanistic hypothesis tracking: A structured set of mechanistic hypotheses is evaluated with validated/refined/contradicted status reported in accompanying tables. Datasets included (pre-processed for replication) GSE84422 (MSBB / Mount Sinai): chronic human AD postmortem bulk-tissue Affymetrix microarray, n = 2,004 (125 subjects; 19 regions) GSE255902: acute iPSC-derived 4R tau neurons, RNA-seq, n = 19 GSE163150: acute SH-SY5Y 4R tau cells, RNA-seq, n = 24 Total: 2,047 samples across 3 independent datasets. What’s in this record Manuscript: secretory_shunt_v4.pdf (plus Markdown and LaTeX sources) Scripts: reproduce_v4_correlations.py (recomputes reported statistics), generate_figures.py (regenerates figures) Tables/data products: correlation summaries, hypothesis status tables, and a stage-evolution model JSON Figures: 6 main + 2 supplementary PDFs Reproducibility (quickstart) To reproduce reported statistics: pip install pandas numpy scipy python reproduce_v4_correlations.py Optional (only if re-downloading from GEO; preprocessed files included in this record): pip install GEOparse requests To regenerate figures: pip install matplotlib numpy python generate_figures.py Limitations / scope GSE84422 is bulk tissue; results can be confounded by cell-type composition and regional effects. GSE84422 includes repeated measures; the packaged processed artifact does not include donor IDs for subject-level modeling, so p-values may be inflated if samples are treated as independent. All results are correlational; mechanistic directionality requires perturbational validation. This report is for research purposes and does not provide medical guidance. Version notes (v4.0) Corrected GSE84422 modality labeling (microarray, not RNA-seq) Refined therapeutic framework to strictly focus on preclinical hypothesis generation and experimental sequencing Expanded limitations and reproducibility materials License / contact License: CC-BY 4.0 Correspondence: aaron@lumenais.com

Background: Self-monitoring of blood glucose is central to effective management of type 1 diabetes, yet adherence remains suboptimal among adolescents and young adults. Psychological well-being and treatment-related costs may influence glucose monitoring behaviour, particularly in low- and middle-income settings such as India. Objectives: To assess glucose monitoring behaviour among type 1 diabetic patients aged (15–39 years) and to examine the association of psychological quality of life and treatment-related costs with glucose monitoring practices. Methods: A hospital-based cross-sectional analytical study was conducted among 80 type 1 diabetic patients attending a tertiary care endocrinology outpatient department in northern India. Glucose monitoring behaviour was assessed using the glucose monitoring subscale of the Diabetes Self-Management Questionnaire–Revised (DSMQ-R). Psychological quality of life was measured using the psychological domain of the WHOQOL-BREF. Direct and indirect treatment costs were recorded. Hierarchical multiple linear regression analysis was performed after adjusting for sociodemographic variables. Results: Participants demonstrated low glucose monitoring scores, indicating suboptimal monitoring behaviour. Psychological quality of life was positively associated with glucose monitoring behaviour (β = 0.398, p<0.01), while higher indirect treatment costs were associated with poorer monitoring (β = −0.242, p < 0.05). Increasing age was negatively associated with glucose monitoring, whereas higher caregiver education showed a positive association. The final regression model explained 51.0% of the variance in glucose monitoring behaviour. Conclusion: Glucose monitoring behaviour among type 1 diabetic patients in India is influenced by psychological well-being and economic burden. Interventions addressing mental health and reducing treatment-related costs may improve glucose monitoring adherence in this population.

Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) genotypes are associated with pathogenesis of various neurological diseases. This study was designed to explore the association of ApoE polymorphism with risk of various neurological diseases- Alzheimer’s disease (AD), non-AD dementia, Parkinson’s disease (PD), stroke, Multiple sclerosis (MS) and Wilson’s diseases (WD). A cross-sectional study was performed on 113 non diseased and 350 diseased subjects (AD, PD & stroke) from Institute of Human Behavior & Allied Sciences (IHBAS), New Delhi (India). ApoE genotyping was done in all subjects by ARMS-PCR method. In AD, non-AD dementia, PD, stroke, MS and WD groups, 103 subjects, 43, 36, 112, 24 and 32 subjects were included respectively in the study, whereas non-diseased group had 113 subjects. Average age in diseased and non diseased groups was 61.27 years (SD= 14.07) and 57.45 years (SD= 14.25) respectively. On genetic analysis for ApoE, ε3/3 was found to be the most predominant genotype in both groups. In association study ε4 allele was identified as a risk factor in all neurological diseases. Specifically, ε4 was a significant risk factor in AD with 2.5 times increased risk (COR: 2.73, CI: 1.32 – 5.65). However, ApoEε2 emerged as a protective factor in AD, but a risk factor in non-AD dementia, PD and stroke (COR: 2.10, CI: 0.93 – 4.76). ε4 allele has been found strongly associated with Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease, whereas ε2 emerged out as a risk factor for stroke, non-AD dementia and PD.

The study employed a comprehensive graphical presentation and statistical analysis using data from 2017 to 2023 to assess how different dimensions of foreign aid impact the HIV/AIDS prevalence rate in South Africa. The finding suggests that as the proportion of foreign aid increases, HIV/AIDs prevalence tends to decrease. Consequently, result of funding for treatment has correlation (r = -0.657). This moderate negative association reinforces the traditional belief that investments in direct treatment are effective in reducing disease prevalence. The relationship between funding allocated to education reveals a notable positive correlation (r = 0.33) with HIV prevalence. Against this backdrop, the policymakers in South Africa should prioritize allocating resources to quality programs that have robust passthrough effects on HIV/AIDs reduction in the country. Also, given the current termination of about 40 USAID funded projects in South Africa, if the policymakers in South Africa desire to prevent further escalation of HIV prevalence in the country, they should explore substantive internal sources of fundings.

Sürdürülebilir kalkınma ve sürdürülebilir üretim; yalnızca çevresel tahribatı azaltmaya yönelik bir refleks değildir. Aynı zamanda küresel ekonominin uzun vadeli dayanıklılığını sağlayan temel bir paradigma değişimidir. Bu çalışmada sürdürülebilir üretimin ilkeleri, boyutları, süreçleri üzerinde durulmuş ve zorluklar ele alınmıştır. Çalışmanın çerçevesini Birleşmiş Milletlerin toplam 17 başlıkta ele aldığı Sürdürülebilir Kalkınma Amaçlarından 12. Amaç olan Sorumlu Üretim ve Tüketim amacı oluşturmaktadır. Bu amaç altındaki hedefler ve Türkiye’de bu hedeflere yönelik konu ile ilgili faaliyetlerde bulunmuş olan işletmelerin uygulama örnekleri incelenmiştir. Yapılan uygulamalar toplu olarak değerlendirildiğinde Şirketlerin sürdürülebilirlik bilgilerini raporlama döngülerine entegre etmeyi teşvik eden SKA 12.6, Türkiye’nin en güçlü olduğu alanlardan biri olduğu görülmektedir. Bunun yanı sıra Döngüsel Ekonomi ve Atık Yönetimi (SKA 12.4 ve 12.5) ve Turizmde Sürdürülebilirlik (SKA 12.b) konularında ciddi adımlar atıldığı tespit edilmiştir.

Sürdürülebilir kalkınma ve sürdürülebilir üretim; yalnızca çevresel tahribatı azaltmaya yönelik bir refleks değildir. Aynı zamanda küresel ekonominin uzun vadeli dayanıklılığını sağlayan temel bir paradigma değişimidir. Bu çalışmada sürdürülebilir üretimin ilkeleri, boyutları, süreçleri üzerinde durulmuş ve zorluklar ele alınmıştır. Çalışmanın çerçevesini Birleşmiş Milletlerin toplam 17 başlıkta ele aldığı Sürdürülebilir Kalkınma Amaçlarından 12. Amaç olan Sorumlu Üretim ve Tüketim amacı oluşturmaktadır. Bu amaç altındaki hedefler ve Türkiye’de bu hedeflere yönelik konu ile ilgili faaliyetlerde bulunmuş olan işletmelerin uygulama örnekleri incelenmiştir. Yapılan uygulamalar toplu olarak değerlendirildiğinde Şirketlerin sürdürülebilirlik bilgilerini raporlama döngülerine entegre etmeyi teşvik eden SKA 12.6, Türkiye’nin en güçlü olduğu alanlardan biri olduğu görülmektedir. Bunun yanı sıra Döngüsel Ekonomi ve Atık Yönetimi (SKA 12.4 ve 12.5) ve Turizmde Sürdürülebilirlik (SKA 12.b) konularında ciddi adımlar atıldığı tespit edilmiştir.

Antiretroviral treatment (ART) plays a significant role in the wellbeing of individuals living with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Adherence to ART is vital for patients since it helps to prevent the virus from multiplying and spreading through the body. This study explored challenges that hinder patients' adherence to ART at a mobile clinic of KwaZulu-Natal municipality, South Africa. A qualitative research approach was utilised, using an exploratory and descriptive design. Purposive sampling was used to select five participants aged 18 years and older, receiving treatment at a mobile clinic. Data were collected through semi-structured interviews from patients who defaulted ART treatment and analysed thematically. The findings revealed barriers to adherence as socioeconomic factors, stigma, and discrimination. Addressing ART non-adherence requires a multifaceted approach involving healthcare providers, policymakers, and community support structures. Recommendations include improving patient education on treatment adherence, ensuring consistent availability of medication at mobile clinics, and implementing patient-centered care strategies to enhance healthcare provider-patient relationships. Strengthening support systems within families and communities can also play a critical role in reducing stigma and encouraging adherence. Future research should explore adherence challenges in diverse settings, including urban areas, to develop broader interventions.

Este artículo analiza la reflexividad crítica como fundamento de la práctica pedagógica en Educación Alimentaria y Nutricional (EAN), destacando su papel en la autoformación y el desarrollo profesional del nutricionista dietista. A partir de experiencias laborales y de la sistematización de un programa educativo dirigido a escolares, se exploran las dimensiones ética, emocional, práctica, política, sociocultural y transformadora que estructuran el proceso reflexivo. Se argumenta que reflexionar es un proceso colectivo, situado y éticamente comprometido, indispensable para cuestionar modelos prescriptivos y para responder a las complejidades de los entornos alimentarios. La reflexividad crítica se presenta como una condición necesaria para construir prácticas pedagógicas más dialógicas, contextualizadas y orientadas a la justicia alimentaria. Palabras claves: educación alimentaria, autoformación, nutricionista dietista, justicia alimentaria, educación popular

This study analysed the relationship between rural sanitation and survival rates of children less than five years in China. The data from the World Bank for the period 2000 to 2020 were obtained via the World Development Indicators (WDI). The central theme was to determine the correlation between access to basic rural sanitation and two essential child survival indicators: stunting heights and under-five mortality. The study used graphical trend analysis and statistical correlation to determine trends and correlations across time. Findings showed a high negative correlation between under-five mortality, and rural sanitation and between stunting and rural sanitation. The results indicate that with improved access to sanitation, there is reduced stunted growth and mortality among the children. Reduction in stunting growth was attributed to limited exposure to sanitation-related diseases such as diarrhoea, the common culprits of malnutrition and mortality among under five children. We conclude that increased access to rural sanitation is associated with increased child survival and should receive priority in health and development policy. Integration of sanitation efforts into maternal and child health programs and further investments in rural sanitation infrastructure can also improve health outcomes and support the attainment of global development targets.

This descriptive study addresses a critical research gap by examining HPV and cervical neoplasia among women who have sex with women (WSW) in Cameroon, an underserved population. WSW typically undergo less frequent cervical cancer screening. We conducted a pilot study in Douala, Cameroon, recruiting WSW through Elle Cameroon, a community organization serving underserved populations. Working within the Cameroon Baptist Convention Health Services, participants underwent HPV screening and Visual Inspection with Acetic Acid (VIA) enhanced by Digital Cervicography (DC). We ran the frequencies and determined the p-values, prevalence odds ratios (POR) and prevalence risk ratios (PRR) using STATA 17. Statistical significance was set at 0.05. Of 26 participants enrolled, 19 (73.1%) provided valid HPV results, with 57.9% (11/19) testing positive for HPV. Also 80.8 % (21/26) of the participants were screened for cervical neoplasia and 19.05% (4/19) were positive. There was no significant association between HPV cervical neoplasia. Those who were HPV positive had 1.4 and 1.3 POR and PRR respectively. Our results suggest high prevalence of oncogenic HPV and cervical neoplasia among WSW in Cameroon. An adequately powered study is needed to further elucidate these findings and address healthcare disparities in this underserved population.

Maternal health service utilization in rural India remains a persistent challenge, often hindered by gaps in knowledge and behavioral barriers. To address this, this study evaluated the impact of a targeted multimedia campaign on maternal health awareness and service uptake in a rural Karnataka community. A rigorous Solomon Four-Group experimental design was employed, where 160 pregnant or postpartum women were randomized into four groups. The intervention consisted of a six-month, culturally-tailored multimedia campaign delivered in the local Kannada language through channels including radio, video, posters, and mobile messages, while control groups received standard care.The campaign yielded statistically significant improvements in maternal health knowledge (p&lt;0.001) and recognition of critical danger signs. Women exposed to the intervention had substantially higher odds of attending at least four antenatal care visits (OR: 3.66), choosing institutional delivery (OR: 2.78), and receiving timely postnatal care (OR: 2.78). The study design confirmed these effects were directly attributable to the intervention, not pre-test sensitization. The findings suggest that targeted, culturally-grounded multimedia campaigns are a highly effective and scalable strategy for improving maternal health knowledge and translating it into practice in similar rural settings.

Women can experience varying degrees of pain associated with menstruation during each cycle. They use both non-pharmacological and pharmacological methods to reduce menstrual pain. One of the non-pharmacological methods for reducing pain is the acupuncture-based Su Jok therapy. This study aims to determine the effect of Su Jok application in reducing menstrual pain The study was conducted as a single-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial with nursing students. In the study, pain levels in both groups decreased significantly after the intervention. There was no significant difference between the groups' mean pain scores.. When the change from the first to the last measurements was examined, there was no statistically significant difference between the groups, although the reduction in the experimental group was greater than in the control group. As a result of the study, both correct-point and sham-point applications reduced pain.

Among the various treatment modalities for chronic anal fissures, lateral internal sphincterotomy, acknowledged as the gold standard, is associated with superior healing rates but entails a higher risk of complications due to its invasive nature. Conversely, botulinum toxin injection, a minimally invasive alternative, remains a viable therapeutic option for select patient populations despite its relatively higher recurrence rate, owing to its favorable safety profile. The objective of this study was to compare the botulinum toxin and sphincterotomy efficacy in the management of chronic anal fissure. Two groups were compared in treatment outcomes after botulinum toxin injection and lateral internal sphincterotomy. The study cohort comprised women diagnosed with chronic anal fissure and treated between 2017 and 2022. Patients underwent botulinum toxin injections and partial sphincterotomy. Clinical outcomes and examination findings were assessed to determine the therapeutic efficacy of botulinum toxin infiltration in comparison to surgical intervention. An increased recurrence rate was noted in patients with a prolonged disease course and posteriorly located fissures. Botulinum toxin may serve as a first-line therapeutic strategy in individuals with a low predisposition to recurrence, offering an effective and safer alternative in appropriately selected cases.

This study examines the role of naturopathy centers in rural development in Purandar Tehsil, Pune District, Maharashtra. The study has of naturopathy centre Narayanpur, Saswad in view of health tourism. Naturopathy - a system of preventive and primitive health care based on natural therapies - has seen renewed interest in rural India for its low-cost, locally adaptable interventions. Using a mixed-methods case-study approach, the research combined structured household surveys, semi structured interviews with naturopathy practitioners and local stakeholders, participant observation at multiple centers and analysis of secondary health and development records. All the findings show that naturopathy center contribute positively to primary health care as well as rural development. It supports local livelihoods through employment of local staff, use of herbs, vegetables, fruits from local farmers and small scale health tourism. Narayndham Naturopathy Centre is located in Purandar tehsil; climate is calm, green landscape, serene natural beauty best location for relaxation from busy life. This helps to improve human health. Their road connectivity is good and nearby from all the cities. Most patients’ reported satisfaction with reasonable casts, experienced staff & supportive environment.

This study examines the role of naturopathy centers in rural development in Purandar Tehsil, Pune District, Maharashtra. The study has of naturopathy centre Narayanpur, Saswad in view of health tourism. Naturopathy - a system of preventive and primitive health care based on natural therapies - has seen renewed interest in rural India for its low-cost, locally adaptable interventions. Using a mixed-methods case-study approach, the research combined structured household surveys, semi structured interviews with naturopathy practitioners and local stakeholders, participant observation at multiple centers and analysis of secondary health and development records. All the findings show that naturopathy center contribute positively to primary health care as well as rural development. It supports local livelihoods through employment of local staff, use of herbs, vegetables, fruits from local farmers and small scale health tourism. Narayndham Naturopathy Centre is located in Purandar tehsil; climate is calm, green landscape, serene natural beauty best location for relaxation from busy life. This helps to improve human health. Their road connectivity is good and nearby from all the cities. Most patients’ reported satisfaction with reasonable casts, experienced staff & supportive environment.

Family planning is essential for fertility management in Indonesia, where population increase is still a multifaceted problem. Using data from 2017 Indonesian Health Survey (IDHS), this study examines the perceptions that influence couples to choose sterilization contraception due to its low adoption rate and female domination. The design was cross-sectional with a sample of 8,344 couples of reproductive age. Analysis was conducted univariate, bivariate, and multivariate the using logistic regression. The results showed that only 3.8% of PUS used sterilization, with a significant gender disparity (female: 4.5%; male: 0.1%). The perception was found to be significantly associated (OR Model 3 = 2.14; 95% CI: 1.555-2.956). This study demonstrates how male participation in sterilization is hampered by social norms and traditional gender roles, including the belief that contraception is a woman's responsibility. Sterilization adoption rates could be balanced and increased male participation in family planning encouraged by promoting gender equality through education and focused campaigns.

This study employed a network toxicology approach to investigate the potential toxic effects and molecular mechanisms of hair dye components in relation to breast and bladder cancer. By integrating data from multiple databases and performing Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analyses, key targets and pathways were identified. Network and molecular docking analyses revealed that major hair dye chemicals may induce carcinogenesis through xenobiotic metabolism and interact with critical proteins involved in cancer pathways. These findings provide theoretical support for the health risks associated with hair dye exposure and offer insights into potential preventive strategies.

Este artículo analiza la reflexividad crítica como fundamento de la práctica pedagógica en Educación Alimentaria y Nutricional (EAN), destacando su papel en la autoformación y el desarrollo profesional del nutricionista dietista. A partir de experiencias laborales y de la sistematización de un programa educativo dirigido a escolares, se exploran las dimensiones ética, emocional, práctica, política, sociocultural y transformadora que estructuran el proceso reflexivo. Se argumenta que reflexionar es un proceso colectivo, situado y éticamente comprometido, indispensable para cuestionar modelos prescriptivos y para responder a las complejidades de los entornos alimentarios. La reflexividad crítica se presenta como una condición necesaria para construir prácticas pedagógicas más dialógicas, contextualizadas y orientadas a la justicia alimentaria. Palabras claves: educación alimentaria, autoformación, nutricionista dietista, justicia alimentaria, educación popular

Abstract— This study aims to draw the attention of actors involved in the management of infectious medical waste to the potential risks posed to human health and the environment. Cocody University Hospital (CHU de Cocody), due to its central role in the healthcare system, was selected as the research site. To achieve the study’s objectives, scientific literature and results from field surveys were mobilized. Our investigations show that the informal and inadequate management of hospital waste at the CHU of Cocody is strongly linked to the neglect of established standards issued by the Ministry of Health as well as socioeconomic constraints. Waste sorting, which should be performed at the source by healthcare staff, is frequently bypassed. This failure greatly complicates the management of infectious medical waste. The repeated breakdowns of the incinerator are largely due to improper sorting practices, resulting in some infectious waste being diverted to landfills. Such waste becomes a source of contamination for soil, air, and both surface and groundwater, posing serious risks to all individuals exposed to it. The research highlights how social actors develop strategies that operate outside formal norms to meet their own interests.

In sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), adolecsent girls and young women (AGYW) encounter numerous obstacles related to sexual and reproductive health and rights (SRHR), one of which is the unfulfilled need for contemporary contraception. Unwanted pregnancies, unsafe abortions, and high fertility rates are still common among this population group despite global efforts to increase access to family planning, which has a negative impact on the health of both mothers and children. Utilizing data from the most recent Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) carried out in 26 countries throughout the region, this study analysed a weighted sample of 85,648 AGYWs aged 15–24 to investigate the determinants of unmet need for contraceptives among in SSA. The study utilized binary logistic regression to investigate determinants of unmet need. The pooled prevalence of unmet need for modern contraception was 27.0%. The results show that unmet need for contraception was significantly associated with several determinants. Being highly educated (AOR=1.69, 95% CI: 1.46–1.97, p&lt;0.001), residing in one place for 15–19 years (AOR=1.59, 1.37-1.77, p&lt;0.001) were associated with higher odds of unmet need for contraceptives. However, being aged 15–19 (AOR=0.89, 95% CI: 0.85–0.93, p&lt;0.001), history of pregnancy termination (AOR=0.73, 95% CI: 0.68–0.80, p&lt;0.001), using calendar-based contraceptives (AOR=0.16, 95% CI: 0.15–0.17, p&lt;0.001) living in rural (AOR=0.80, 95% CI: 0.76–0.85, p&lt;0.001) were associate will lower odds of unmet need for contraceptives. In conclusion, this study provides critical insights into the determinants of unmet contraceptive needs among AGYW in SSA, highlighting the influence of education, residential stability, age, reproductive history, contraceptive method choice, and geographic location.

This study aims to explore the association between a sedentary lifestyle and marital dissolution. The research sample was drawn from 7,940 individuals aged 20 and above who participated in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) from 2013 to 2018. In this study, a logistic regression model was employed to estimate the odds ratio (OR) of the relationship between sedentary behavior and marital dissolution. After adjusting for all covariates, sedentary behavior of 600 minutes or more was significantly associated with marital dissolution, with an odds ratio (OR) of 1.191 (95% CI: 1.026-1.381, P&lt;0.05); sedentary behavior in men was not statistically significant (P&gt;0.05); after adjusting for all covariates, sedentary behavior of 600 minutes or more in women was significantly associated with marital dissolution, OR=1.300 (95% CI: 1.067-1.583, P&lt;0.01). The research findings suggest that prolonged sedentary behavior may be a potential risk factor for marital dissolution.

Abstract— This study aims to draw the attention of actors involved in the management of infectious medical waste to the potential risks posed to human health and the environment. Cocody University Hospital (CHU de Cocody), due to its central role in the healthcare system, was selected as the research site. To achieve the study’s objectives, scientific literature and results from field surveys were mobilized. Our investigations show that the informal and inadequate management of hospital waste at the CHU of Cocody is strongly linked to the neglect of established standards issued by the Ministry of Health as well as socioeconomic constraints. Waste sorting, which should be performed at the source by healthcare staff, is frequently bypassed. This failure greatly complicates the management of infectious medical waste. The repeated breakdowns of the incinerator are largely due to improper sorting practices, resulting in some infectious waste being diverted to landfills. Such waste becomes a source of contamination for soil, air, and both surface and groundwater, posing serious risks to all individuals exposed to it. The research highlights how social actors develop strategies that operate outside formal norms to meet their own interests.

Intravenous access is a critical component of clinical care for neonates. Given neonates' underdeveloped vascular systems, fragile skin barrier, and immature immune responses, they experience substantially higher rates of catheter-related complications (including infections and bleeding) compared to adult populations. This research introduces an innovative Full-Cycle Indwelling Needle Management (FCINM), establishing a tripartite framework of "Evaluation-Implementation-Surveillance". By combining advanced dressing techniques and proactive maintenance protocols, this approach significantly enhances first-attempt success rates (92.0% vs. 74.0%, p=0.017) while reducing catheterization time. Post-implementation results showed reductions in complication rates, along with improvements in care adherence. Compared with the standard care group, the observation group showed no significant difference in puncture site infection rates, the observation group demonstrated significantly lower infection rates through antimicrobial-impregnated dressings and proactive maintenance approaches. In conclusion, FCINM enhances the accuracy and safety of neonatal intravenous therapy by integrating technological advancements and procedural refinements.

This study examined the nexus between poverty, inequality, and teenage pregnancy in South Africa from 2017 to 2023. This study used socioeconomic indicators from the World Bank and United Nations Human Development Index (HDI) to determine the prevalence of teenage pregnancy in South Africa. The results showed that human development index has a clear inverse relationship with adolescent fertility underscoring the importance of education and healthcare in reducing teenage pregnancy in the country. Similarly, Gross National Income, GNI per capita demonstrated an inverse relationship with teenage pregnancy. This is an indication that high poverty level fuels a rise in the incidence of the teenage pregnancy in South Africa. However, the Gini coefficient reflects a mixed relationship which suggests a complex association between income inequality and adolescent fertility rate. Though the study points towards a positive association in some context, the specific trends suggest that teenage pregnancy in South Africa might be influenced by multiple factors beyond income inequality. Therefore, we recommend that South African policymakers should prioritize investment in human capital development in order to reduce the incidence of teenage pregnancy.

Abstract Introduction - Digital harm reduction has emerged as a critical public health strategy as substance use patterns and communication landscapes shift. Social media, mass media, and mobile health (mHealth) applications now play an increasingly central role in delivering accessible, rapid, and user-centered harm reduction information. Method - A comprehensive literature search was conducted across PubMed, Google Scholar, PsycINFO, ProQuest, and ScienceDirect for publications between 2015 and 2025. Search terms related to social media, mass media, mHealth, digital harm reduction, safer use, and substance use prevention were used. A supplementary targeted web search was used to identify additional commentary and practice-based resources. Results - Social media platforms such as TikTok, Instagram, Facebook, and YouTube support harm reduction by sharing accurate information, countering misinformation, and normalizing naloxone use through hashtags, storytelling, and influencer-led campaigns. Mass media campaigns deliver wide-reaching public health messages but vary in effectiveness based on message design and cultural relevance. mHealth applications such as the Digital Overdose Response System (DORS), ikeepr, and Unity Philly provide supervised use monitoring, life-skills training, mental health screening, and coordinated care, offering scalable and personalized digital support. Discussion - Findings demonstrate that digital platforms enhance reach, reduce stigma-related barriers, and complement traditional harm-reduction services. However, challenges persist, including algorithmic suppression, unequal digital access, misinformation risks, and ethical concerns related to privacy and data governance. Evidence for long-term effectiveness remains limited, with most tools showing stronger impact in short-term engagement and education. Conclusion - Digital harm reduction provides flexible, accessible, and scalable pathways for safer use education and early intervention, but should complement, not replace, traditional in-person services.

Uterine fibroids are the most common benign tumors affecting women of reproductive age, often requiring surgical intervention. This meta-analysis and systematic review compared the effectiveness, safety, and cost of three surgical approaches: robotic-assisted laparoscopic myomectomy (RLM), traditional abdominal myomectomy (AM), and laparoscopic myomectomy (LM). Following PRISMA guidelines, we systematically searched PubMed, EMBASE, and Google Scholar databases for studies published through January 2024, with no restrictions on publication date. Fifteen studies were included in the qualitative synthesis, and nine studies in the meta-analysis, comprising 2,559 patients. Our findings revealed that AM had significantly shorter operative time compared to RLM (mean difference: 82.54 minutes; 95% CI: -122.14, -42.93; P &lt; 0.00001; I² = 94%). However, RLM was associated with significantly shorter hospital stays than AM (mean difference: 1.54 days; 95% CI: 1.31 to 1.77; P≤0.00001; I²=58%). No significant differences were found in operative time (mean difference: 36.47 minutes; 95% CI: -11.58, 84.51; P = 0.14) or blood loss between RLM and LM. Intraoperative bleeding (EBL &gt;1000 mL) was most common in AM (7.0%) compared to RLM (1.3%) and LM (2.6%). Postoperative transfusion rates were highest in AM (20%), followed by LM (5.8%) and RLM (3.8%). The study demonstrated substantial heterogeneity (I² &gt; 75% for most outcomes), attributed to differences in patient characteristics and study designs. In conclusion, RLM provides favorable outcomes with shorter hospital stays and fewer complications compared to AM, while showing comparable results to LM, though at potentially higher cost.

This study developed a mobile health-based early identification model for postpartum depression (PPD) and evaluated its effectiveness in community postpartum visits. A randomized controlled trial included 102 postpartum women (intervention: n=54; control: n=48). The intervention group used the "Maternal Love Guardian" app, integrating clinical risk factors and digital phenotyping (behavioral, emotional, cognitive, and voice data) to stratify PPD risk. Primary outcomes included detection rates, model performance, and intervention adherence. The model achieved 90.0% sensitivity and 84.1% specificity (AUC=0.871) at 3 weeks postpartum. The intervention group had significantly shorter PPD identification time (11.8 vs. 26.9 days, P&lt;0.001) and higher early intervention rates (25.9% vs. 8.3%, P=0.019). Digital phenotyping revealed key differences in sleep, step count, social activity, and speech rate in PPD cases. At 12 weeks, symptom improvement was faster (4.3 vs. 6.9 weeks, P=0.009), and mother-infant interaction scores improved (77.8 vs. 72.1, P=0.033). Community providers reported 23% reduced consultation time (P&lt;0.001). Cost-effectiveness was favorable (8,924 RMB per QALY). The mobile health model enhances PPD detection, accelerates intervention, and improves outcomes efficiently.

This study aimed to investigate the level of inpatient health care satisfaction and healthy life education consciousness of parents.The study employed a descriptive, correlational, and cross-sectional study design. This study consisted of 211 parents whose children were monitored as inpatients in the pediatric clinic of the State Hospital. The data were collected with the Parent and Child Descriptive Information Form, PedsQL Healthcare Satisfaction Scale (PHSS), and Healthy Life Education Conscious Level Scale in Parents (HLECLSP). The average HLECLSP score of the parents in the study was 125.65±19.65, and the PHSS average score was 69.80±20.25, which was at a moderate level. It was determined that the mean scores of PHSS varied according to the status of the following current developments related to the health and hospitalization process, and these differences were statistically significant. It was determined that the mean scores of HLECLSP differed according to family type, education level, working status, parents’ job, and parents’ status of following current developments, and these differences were statistically significant. Parents' satisfaction with health care was determined to increase in parallel with their perception of healthy life education consciousness. It is especially recommended that health care environments be improved in terms of parents' emotional support needs, and updated healthy life awareness training programs for parents be included.

prenatal attachment. The study was conducted in Türkiye between January and May 2024. It was determined that the difference between the pregnant women's Scale of Decision-Making Via The Internet In Pregnancy (DMIP) score averages and their ability to obtain information about age, education level, number of pregnancies, pregnancy, birth and postpartum period; between the Prenatal Attachment Inventory (PAI) score averages and their ability to obtain information about age, education level, employment status, family type, number of pregnancies, pregnancy, birth and postpartum period; and between the Self-Care Agency Scale (SCAS) score averages and their education level and number of pregnancies were statistically significant (p&lt;0.05). It has been determined that the prenatal attachment and self-care levels of pregnant women who make decisions via the internet increase depending on their age, education level, employment status and number of children. According to study, midwives should constantly communicate with the woman during pregnancy, childbirth, and the postpartum period and have sufficient capacity and sensitivity in terms of providing her with information based on her needs.

Introducción: El presente caso clínico es relevante por tratarse de una clase II esqueletal causada por retrognatismo mandibular en un paciente en fase de crecimiento activo. Su importancia se establece en mostrar como un tratamiento ortopédico – ortodóntico en edades temprana es eficaz para una corrección de las discrepancias óseas y evitar una intervención quirúrgica, así aportando evidencia sobre la corrección de esta maloclusión en su etapa inicial. Presentación del caso: Niña de 10 años de edad acude a la clínica ortodóntica de la Universidad Particular San Gregorio de Portoviejo manifestando problemas en la mordida. En la evaluación se observó un perfil con maxilar adelantado sobremordida aumentada, incompetencia labial y ángulo ANB de 8º, lo que reafirma una clase II esqueletal por retrognatismo mandibular. Se programó un tratamiento en tres etapas: iniciando con un dispositivo funcional tipo Bionator para estimular el crecimiento mandibular; continuando con un dispositivo fijo MBT estabilizando la oclusión, finalmente después de 30 meses de tratamiento, el ángulo ANB se redujo a 6°, regenerando visiblemente el perfil facial y la función oclusal. Conclusiones: El caso muestra que una intervención ortopédica – ortodóntica en etapas tempranas permite llevar un desarrollo mandibular de manera efectiva, reduciendo así los tratamientos quirúrgicos en la etapa adulta. La evaluación cefalométrica o, y la perseverancia del paciente son claves para el éxito en el tratamiento. Se termina de forma, eficiente y visible para la corrección de la clase II esqueletal por retrognatismo mandibular. Metodología: Se utilizo un enfoque cualitativo con la ayuda del análisis del caso clínico, llevando un registro de su inicio y finalización para mostrar la efectividad del tratamiento ortopédico– ortodóntico en la corrección de la clase II esqueletal por retrognatismo mandibular, respaldado en criterios, diagnósticos y literatura científica.

Abstract Introduction - Digital harm reduction has emerged as a critical public health strategy as substance use patterns and communication landscapes shift. Social media, mass media, and mobile health (mHealth) applications now play an increasingly central role in delivering accessible, rapid, and user-centered harm reduction information. Method - A comprehensive literature search was conducted across PubMed, Google Scholar, PsycINFO, ProQuest, and ScienceDirect for publications between 2015 and 2025. Search terms related to social media, mass media, mHealth, digital harm reduction, safer use, and substance use prevention were used. A supplementary targeted web search was used to identify additional commentary and practice-based resources. Results - Social media platforms such as TikTok, Instagram, Facebook, and YouTube support harm reduction by sharing accurate information, countering misinformation, and normalizing naloxone use through hashtags, storytelling, and influencer-led campaigns. Mass media campaigns deliver wide-reaching public health messages but vary in effectiveness based on message design and cultural relevance. mHealth applications such as the Digital Overdose Response System (DORS), ikeepr, and Unity Philly provide supervised use monitoring, life-skills training, mental health screening, and coordinated care, offering scalable and personalized digital support. Discussion - Findings demonstrate that digital platforms enhance reach, reduce stigma-related barriers, and complement traditional harm-reduction services. However, challenges persist, including algorithmic suppression, unequal digital access, misinformation risks, and ethical concerns related to privacy and data governance. Evidence for long-term effectiveness remains limited, with most tools showing stronger impact in short-term engagement and education. Conclusion - Digital harm reduction provides flexible, accessible, and scalable pathways for safer use education and early intervention, but should complement, not replace, traditional in-person services.

Maternal mortality remains a major public health issue in Burkina Faso. We analyzed data from the Centre-East health region, a setting with a high maternal mortality rate to identify the underlying driving factors. We conducted a case-control study with 1:2 matching ratio. Cases (deceased women) were randomly selected from a registry of maternal deaths, while the controls were selected from hospital logs of uncomplicated deliveries between January 1st, 2020, and June 30th, 2022. We fitted logistic regression to identify associated factors, considering differences significant when the 95% confidence intervals of the odds ratio do not include 1. Overall, among deceased women, 81% were referred, 33% were aged between 19 and 24 years, 82.4% were illiterate, 47% attended less than 4 antenatal care visits, and 39% came from the Ouargaye health district. Fever was associated with an increased odd of maternal death, with an adjusted odds ratio (aOR) of 2.94 (95%CI: 1.47-5.90). women with a normal coloration of conjunctivae during labor were less likely to die compared to those with conjunctival pallor: aOR =0.02 (95%CI: 0.004-0.11). These results suggest that preventing and treating fever and infections could help to reduce maternal deaths during delivery in the Centre-East region, Burkina Faso.

This study investigates the impact of menstrual symptoms (MS) on workplace productivity among 384 women in the IT, healthcare and education sectors. Women provided data on menstrual flow, irregularity, pain, tiredness, concentration trouble and rated their performance on a 1-5 scale. Findings suggest that 52.9% of participants had decreased job performance during menstruation ( 53% lower score) while 87.8% had regular cycles and 60.7% experienced normal flow. Exploratory Factor Analysis indicated a stronger association between MS and reduced productivity than with absenteeism (Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin or KMO = 0.60 for shared variable structure per standard thresholds; Bartlett’s χ² = 3516.13, p&lt;.001 implying &lt;0.1% chance of an identity correlation matrix). Moderate strength was noticed between concentration issues and menstrual cycle characteristics (Cramer’s V≈0.32, p&lt;.001). The study highlights the urgent need for workplace policies that address menstrual health, including flexible arrangements and improved hygiene support, to enhance employee well-being and efficiency.

Introducción: El presente caso clínico es relevante por tratarse de una clase II esqueletal causada por retrognatismo mandibular en un paciente en fase de crecimiento activo. Su importancia se establece en mostrar como un tratamiento ortopédico – ortodóntico en edades temprana es eficaz para una corrección de las discrepancias óseas y evitar una intervención quirúrgica, así aportando evidencia sobre la corrección de esta maloclusión en su etapa inicial. Presentación del caso: Niña de 10 años de edad acude a la clínica ortodóntica de la Universidad Particular San Gregorio de Portoviejo manifestando problemas en la mordida. En la evaluación se observó un perfil con maxilar adelantado sobremordida aumentada, incompetencia labial y ángulo ANB de 8º, lo que reafirma una clase II esqueletal por retrognatismo mandibular. Se programó un tratamiento en tres etapas: iniciando con un dispositivo funcional tipo Bionator para estimular el crecimiento mandibular; continuando con un dispositivo fijo MBT estabilizando la oclusión, finalmente después de 30 meses de tratamiento, el ángulo ANB se redujo a 6°, regenerando visiblemente el perfil facial y la función oclusal. Conclusiones: El caso muestra que una intervención ortopédica – ortodóntica en etapas tempranas permite llevar un desarrollo mandibular de manera efectiva, reduciendo así los tratamientos quirúrgicos en la etapa adulta. La evaluación cefalométrica o, y la perseverancia del paciente son claves para el éxito en el tratamiento. Se termina de forma, eficiente y visible para la corrección de la clase II esqueletal por retrognatismo mandibular. Metodología: Se utilizo un enfoque cualitativo con la ayuda del análisis del caso clínico, llevando un registro de su inicio y finalización para mostrar la efectividad del tratamiento ortopédico– ortodóntico en la corrección de la clase II esqueletal por retrognatismo mandibular, respaldado en criterios, diagnósticos y literatura científica.

Surveillance of molecular markers of resistance conducted over a ten-year period in Moissala Health District indicates that SP and AQ remain effective despite prolonged use. However, the rise in quadruple mutants-linked to partial SP resistance-is concerning, and monitoring is needed to detect any increase in quintuple mutants, which confer stronger resistance. These findings underscore the importance of sustained molecular surveillance to guide policy decisions and enable timely adaptations of SMC strategies as resistance patterns evolve.

Background: Medical emergencies, such as heart attacks, strokes, allergic reactions, or choking, can happen unexpectedly, and understanding the basic steps to take in these moments can make a significant difference in outcomes. Knowledge on how to tackle common medical emergencies empowers individuals to respond quickly and effectively in critical situations, potentially saving lives. Hence this study was done to assess the general population’s knowledge and preparedness in handling medical emergencies. Methods: This cross-sectional study was conducted among general population above the age of 16 years in a tertiary healthcare centre, Mysuru. A total of 301 were included in the study after obtaining assent from the parents for those between the age of 16-18 years and consent from adults above 18 years consented. A semi-structured self-administered questionnaire was used to collect data and was analysed using SPSS 25 version. Results: The questionnaire assessed awareness of medical emergencies across four scenarios. Heart attack and CPR: 96% identified it correctly, but 66.4% didn’t know CPR. Stroke and FAST: 85.7% diagnosed it, yet 66.1% were unaware of FAST. Choking: 87.4% identified it; 52.8% knew the Heimlich manoeuvre. Poisoning: 95.7% recognized it; nausea (29%) was the most cited symptom. A significant 79.1% had no prior training, but 91% were interested. Suggestions for awareness included workshops, social media clips, and posters in public spaces, with a focus on both urban and rural areas. Conclusions: The research reveals gaps in public knowledge and skills for handling health emergencies, highlighting the need for better education and stronger emergency preparedness efforts.

Aim: Sellar xanthogranuloma (XG) is a rare, tumor-like inflammatory lesion that often mimics Rathke’s cleft cysts or craniopharyngiomas radiologically and clinically. The endoscopic endonasal approach (EEA) has become the preferred surgical corridor for these midline cystic lesions; however, evidence on optimal extent of resection and postoperative outcomes remains limited. We analyzed the clinical, radiologic, and surgical features of pathologically confirmed sellar/suprasellar XGs treated via EEA at a tertiary skull-base center. Material and Methods: We retrospectively reviewed a prospectively maintained database of 6,597 EEAs performed between 1997 and 2025 and identified eight histologically confirmed XG cases. Demographics, presenting symptoms, imaging characteristics, surgical approach, extent of resection, and postoperative outcomes were analyzed. Results: The cohort comprised five females and three males (median age, 26.5 years; range, 13–67). Lesions were suprasellar in five patients (62.5%) and sellar in three (37.5%). Gross-total resection was achieved in seven patients (87.5%), and subtotal resection in one (12.5%). Postoperative complications included one cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak after an extended suprasellar approach (12.5%) and one case of transient diabetes insipidus; no other complications were observed. No recurrences were detected during follow-up. Conclusion: Sellar xanthogranulomas are benign inflammatory-degenerative lesions that closely resemble Rathke’s cleft cysts and craniopharyngiomas, rendering preoperative diagnosis challenging. EEA enables effective decompression with low morbidity when reconstruction is tailored to CSF-leak flow and capsule management is individualized. Long-term radiologic surveillance is preferable to aggressive reoperation.

Kolekcja muzyczna Ewy i Jeremiusza Glensków, zapoczątkowana w 1986 roku w Poznaniu, koncentruje się na drukach i rękopisach muzycznych z XVIII i XIX wieku, szczególnie z okresu klasycyzmu i romantyzmu. Obejmuje ponad 7560 druków oraz 260 rękopisów autorstwa zarówno polskich, jak i zagranicznych kompozytorów, takich jak Chopin, bracia Wieniawscy czy Beethoven. Zbiór reprezentuje szeroki wachlarz gatunków muzycznych: od utworów solowych i kameralnych, przez symfoniczne, wokalne, aż po operowe. Ważną część kolekcji stanowią dzieła kompozytorów związanych z Galicją, w szczególności Antoniego Kątskiego, reprezentowanego przez rzadkie pierwodruki i autografy. Do najcenniejszych należą: jedyny znany egzemplarz jego debiutanckiego dzieła z 1825 roku, a także pierwodruk Le Réveil du Lion (1849) oraz autograf utworu La Resignation (1843). Istotnym rękopisem jest również rzadki, 16-taktowy fragment zaginionego Ronda alla Polacca Wieniawskiego. Archiwum zawiera także ponad 620 listów, które rzucają światło na życie i działalność artystyczną takich postaci, jak Chopin, Paderewski, Poniatowski, Lotto, Wieniawski, Lipiński czy Noskowski. Kolekcja Ewy i Jeremiusza Glensków zachowuje wiele unikalnych, często nieznanych źródeł muzycznych, cennych dla badań i historii muzyki.

An age-distributed immuno-epidemiological model with information-based vaccination proposed in this work represents a system of integro-differential equations with compartments for the numbers of susceptible individuals, infected individuals, vaccinated individuals, and recovered individuals. This model describes the influence of vaccination decisions on epidemic progression in different age groups. In a particular case of the model without age distribution, we determine the basic reproduction number and the final size of epidemic, that is, the limiting number of susceptible individuals at asymptotically large time. Moreover, we study the existence and uniqueness of a positive solution for the age-structured model. Numerical simulations show that the information-based vaccination acceptance can significantly influence the epidemic progression. Though the initial stage of epidemic progression is the same for all memory kernels, as the epidemic progresses and more information about the disease becomes available, further epidemic progression strongly depends on the memory effect. A short-range memory kernel appears to be more effective in restraining the epidemic outbreaks because it allows for more responsive and adaptive vaccination decisions based on the most recent information about the disease. Additionally, the simulation results suggest that relying on either a responsive vaccination approach or a highly effective vaccine alone may be insufficient to significantly reduce the epidemic size and prevent large outbreaks. Both factors are necessary to achieve substantial epidemic control. Moreover, the impacts of the age-dependent initial susceptible population and the age-dependent memory kernel are studied through numerical simulation of the age-dependent model.

Bu çalışma, sinema ve estetik alanındaki akademik yayınların 2014-2024 yılları arasındaki gelişimini bibliyometrik analiz yöntemiyle incelemiştir. Bulgular, bu alandaki akademik ilginin istikrarlı bir şekilde arttığını, ancak uluslararası iş birliklerinin sınırlı olduğunu ve bireysel çalışmaların öne çıktığını göstermektedir. Yıllık yayın artış oranının %7,43 olması, konunun akademik ilgi görmeye devam ettiğini, ancak hızlı bir yükseliş içinde olmadığını işaret etmektedir. Belge başına ortalama atıf sayısının 1,8 olması, çalışmaların akademik etkisinin belirli bir seviyede kaldığını göstermektedir. 2019 yılından itibaren yayın sayılarında belirgin bir artış gözlemlenmiştir. Bu artışın, dijitalleşme, yapay zekâ ve yeni medya teorilerinin sinema estetiği üzerindeki etkisiyle bağlantılı olduğu düşünülmektedir. 2020’de pandemiyle birlikte dijital platformların yükselişi sinema alanındaki yayın artışını tetiklemiştir. 2024’teki hafif düşüş ise akademik ilgide kısmi bir azalmaya işaret etmektedir. Atıf sayılarındaki gerileme, çalışmaların etkisinin zamanla azaldığını göstermektedir. Ülke bazında ABD en fazla makaleye sahipken, Birleşik Krallık toplam atıfta öne çıkmaktadır. Az sayıda makaleyle yüksek atıf alan Hollanda gibi ülkeler ise araştırmaların niteliksel gücünü yansıtmaktadır. Anahtar kelime analizi, sinema ve estetik alanındaki çalışmaların geniş bir yelpazeye yayıldığını ve disiplinlerarası bir nitelik taşıdığını göstermektedir. Sinema estetiği, film endüstrisi, kültürel kimlik, feminizm, çevresel konular ve bölgesel sinema gibi temalar öne çıkmaktadır. Ayrıca, yapay zekâ destekli yaratıcı süreçlerin sinema estetiği üzerindeki etkisine dair artan akademik ilgi, gelecekte bu alanın yeni kavramsal yönelimler kazanabileceğine işaret etmektedir. Çalışmanın bulgularına dayanarak, uluslararası iş birliklerinin artırılması, dijital teknolojilerin sinema estetiği üzerindeki etkilerine odaklanılması, araştırmaların görünürlüğünün artırılarak atıf sayılarının yükseltilmesi, bölgesel sinema çalışmalarının desteklenmesi ve çevresel ve politik sinema konularına daha fazla ilgi gösterilmesi önerilmektedir. Sinema alanındaki akademik çalışmaların disiplinlerarası ve küresel iş birlikleriyle desteklenmesi, daha etkili ve kapsayıcı bir bilgi birikimi oluşturulmasına katkı sağlayacaktır.

Introduction: Antimicrobials are the most commonly used medicine. Over-the-counter use of antibiotics is more prevalent in developing countries, contributing to inappropriate use and increasing antimicrobial resistance. Studies regarding over the counter use of antibiotics are lacking in Nepal. The objective of this study was to determine prevalence of over the counter use of antibiotics among patients visiting primary health centre. Methods: A descriptive cross-sectional study was conducted among 377 participants from October 2024 to February 2025 at Outpatient department of Melamchi Primary Health Centre after obtaining ethical approval from the Ethical Review Board of Nepal Health Research Centre (Reference no: 820). Written informed consent was obtained and prevalence of over-the-counter use of antibiotics was examined using a structured proforma. Data was entered into Microsoft Excel, and descriptive statistics were calculated. Results: Among 377 participants, 86 (22.81%) were using over-the-counter antibiotics, of which 45 (52.32%) were male and 41 (47.67%) were female. 40 (46.51%) of those participants using over-the-counter antibiotics were older than 15 years, whereas 3 (3.48%) were less than 1 year of age. The most common presenting symptoms in these patients were related to the respiratory system 39 (45.34%). The most commonly used antibiotic was Amoxicillin plus clavulanic acid; 32 (37.20%). Conclusions: The study reported a lower prevalence of over-the-counter use of antibiotics among patients presenting to primary health centers compared to the ‘WHO South-East Asia Region’.

Objective: Early cardiac structural and functional changes after chemotherapy are significant challenges when treating cancer patients. The aim of this study is the early detection of sub-clinical myocardial systolic depressed functions by echocartography among patients receiving anthracyclines (postoperative chemotherapy).Methods: Early picking up subclinical left ventricular systolic dysfunction by echocardiography (TTE) among patients who had been treated with anthracycline chemotherapy 18 and 3 months before. The study included eighty patients. We reported measurements of left ventricular ejection fractions (LVEF), fractional shortening (FS), mitral annular plane systolic excursion (MAPSE) and global longitudinal strain (GLS). Pre-chemotherapy 3, 6 and 18 months after complete doses of anthracyclines were mearsured.Results: This current prospective cohort study included 80 patients: 8 men (10%), 72 women (90%), with a mean age of 51.95 ± 13.69 years. Number of cycles ranged between 4 and 6 cycles of one of the anthracyclines. Mean heart rate was 76 beats/ minute, mean systolic blood pressure was 118, and mean diastolic blood pressure was 77.5 mmHg. The mean baseline FS was 32.40% ± 5.11%, which significantly decreased to 29.45% ± 5.78% and 26.75% ± 6.85% after 3 and 18 months, respectively. Mean three-dimensional echocardiography measures ejection fraction (3D-EF): Baseline was 61.08% ± 3.62% which was significantly depressed to 58.30% ± 5.54% after 3 months. The mean baseline MAPSE was 13.35 ± 1.35 mm, but it was reduced to 12.69 ± 1.92 mm and 12.60 ± 2.46 mm after 3 and 6 months, respectively. Mean baseline GLS was –17.62 ± 1.32% but reduced to –16.54 ± 2.42%, –15.35 ± 2.64% after 3 and 6 months respectively. By univariate analysis, significant parameters that showed abnormal outcome after 18 months were: gender, ejection fraction (EF), end-diastolic volume of the left ventricle (EDV), end-systolic volume of the left ventricle (ESV), 3D-EF (%), but by multivariate analysis, only EF (%) was significantly correlated with the outcome.Conclusions: Evaluation of myocardial deformation and functional capacity improved early sub-clinical diagnosis of chemotherapyinduced cardiac toxicity. GLS and MAPSE are much more sensitive as predictors for early deterioration of left ventricular functions.

Back ground: Peritonitis among peritoneal dialysis (PD) patients is a major impediment for patient and physician acceptance of peritoneal dialysis as an alternate to hemodialysis. We look at our peritonitis rates among Automated peritoneal dialysis (APD) patients. Methods: All patients undergoing APD were included in the analysis since January 2025 till now and had undergone at least a month of PD. Peritonitis rate was calculated and all factors were closely evaluated. Results: Among 82 APD patients the majority were males. A peritonitis rate was calculated to be 0.62 episodes per patient years. Single mortality among 22 patients who died, was directly attributed to severe sepsis after an episode of peritonitis. Conclusion: The peritonitis rates are better as the experience with the PD is improving. Attention to simple infection prevention protocols and retraining of the patients will further improve the targets to international standards.

Üzerinde yaşadığımız dünyada insanları ve diğer canlıları çeşitli açılardan etkileyen pek çok sorun yaşanmaktadır. Bu sorunlar ise farklı zamanlarda farklı şekillerde etkisini göstermektedir. Bununla birlikte küresel sorunlar daha fazla insan ve çevresel unsurların etkilendiği, etkisinin daha geniş alanlarda hissedildiği sorunlar olarak dikkat çekmektedir. Dolayısıyla bu araştırmanın amacı daha önce çeşitli coğrafya dersleri almış öğretmen adaylarının “küresel sorun” algılarını incelemektir. Bu amaç kapsamında katılımcıların küresel sorun denilince zihin dünyalarında ilk olarak şekillenen ve sorun olarak algıladıkları kavramları ortaya koymak bu çalışmanın ana hedefini oluşturmaktadır. Araştırma bir devlet üniversitesinin eğitim fakültesinde öğrenim gören sınıf ve sosyal bilgiler öğretmen adayları ile yürütülmüştür. Araştırma nitel yaklaşıma göre tasarlanmış ve olgubilim deseni kullanılmıştır. Verilerin toplanmasında kelime ilişkilendirme testi kullanılmıştır. Verilerin analizinde ise içerik analizine yer verilmiştir. Araştırma sonrasında elde edilen bulgulara göre; katılımcıların küresel sorunlarla ilgili çeşitli sayılarda kavram geliştirdikleri, bu kavramların 19 farklı boyutta toplandığı görülmüştür. Ayrıca bu kavramların genellikle iklim ve küresel ısınma ile çevre sorunları boyutunda yoğunlaştığı tespit edilmiştir. Küresel sorun algısına kavramsal olarak bakıldığında ise iklim, küresel ısınma, çevre kirliliği, savaşlar, terör olayları ve salgınların ön plana çıktığı söylenebilir.

<title>Abstract</title> <bold>Background</bold> Adherence to Antiretroviral Therapy (ART) remains a public health challenge among youths. Globally, only 65% of adolescents on ART achieve adherence, with 55% attaining viral suppression. In sub-Saharan Africa, youths account for half of new HIV infections. ART adherence is crucial for treatment effectiveness, quality of life, and reducing HIV transmission. This study examined the relationship between health literacy and ART adherence among youths living with HIV attending Care and Treatment Clinic at Temeke Regional Referral Hospital, Tanzania. <bold>Methods</bold> A cross-sectional study was conducted among 211 youths living with HIV aged 15–24 attending CTC at Temeke Regional Referral Hospital. Participants were systematically sampled from CTC registries. The Health Literacy Questionnaire (HLQ) was used to assess health literacy, and the Medication Adherence Report Scale (MARS-5) was used to assess ART adherence. Data analysis was performed using Stata version 15, including descriptive statistics, bivariable, and multivariable logistic regression. Statistical significance was set at p &lt; 0.05. <bold>Results</bold> ART adherence was 73.5%. Higher adherence was significantly associated with health literacy domains, including feeling understood and supported by healthcare providers, social support, navigating the healthcare system, active engagement with providers, and accessing reliable health information. <bold>Conclusion</bold> ART adherence among YLHIV at Temeke RRH CTC remains below WHO and national targets. Strengthening health literacy through reliable health information, supportive provider interactions, and social support networks can enhance adherence. Targeted interventions addressing these factors are essential to improve ART outcomes among youths living with HIV in Tanzania.

Background Phacomorphic glaucoma is a preventable secondary glaucoma resulting from neglected cataract. This study evaluated the visual and intraocular pressure (IOP) outcomes after cataract surgery in patients diagnosed with phacomorphic glaucoma. MethodsA prospective observational study was conducted at Lumbini Eye Institute, Bhairahawa, Nepal, from August 1 to September 15, 2025, including 42 patients with phacomorphic glaucoma. All underwent comprehensive ophthalmic evaluation and manual small incision cataract surgery (SICS) with intraocular lens implantation. Pre- and postoperative visual acuity (VA), IOP, and complications were assessed. Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS version 16, with significance set at p-value&lt;0.05. ResultsThe mean age was 57.9±10.05 years, with a male-to-female ratio of 1:1.2. Most patients were farmers (69%) from lower socioeconomic backgrounds. The median VA improved significantly from 2.7 LogMAR preoperatively to 1.0 LogMAR postoperatively (p-value&lt;0.001). Mean IOP decreased from 31.6 mmHg to 13.0 mmHg (p-value&lt;0.001). Postoperative complications occurred in 36% of cases, most commonly posterior capsular rupture, posterior capsular opacification, and uveitis. Conclusions Phacomorphic glaucoma predominantly affects elderly individuals from rural and socioeconomically deprived backgrounds. Cataract surgery effectively reduces IOP and improves visual acuity; however, delayed presentation often limits visual recovery due to irreversible optic nerve damage. Early detection, community awareness, and timely surgical intervention are essential to prevent avoidable blindness from lens-induced glaucoma.

Background: Patient satisfaction is a key indicator of quality in healthcare, reflecting patients’ experiences and perceptions of care received. This study aimed to assess patient satisfaction with surgical care in Tabuk, Saudi Arabia, and identify the factors influencing it. Materials and Methods: A cross-sectional, observational study was conducted from August to October 2024 at King Fahad Specialist Hospital, Tabuk, Saudi Arabia, involving 200 surgical patients admitted for elective or emergency procedures. Data were collected using a validated questionnaire that was translated to Arabic and was based on the patient satisfaction questionnaire (PSQ-18), covering sociodemographic details and patient satisfaction across communication, accessibility, technical quality, and interpersonal manner. Responses were measured on a 5-point Likert scale. Statistical analysis using IBM SPSS version 27.0.1 included descriptive statistics, the Mann-Whitney U test, Kruskal-Wallis test, and Spearman’s correlation, with significance set at P &lt; 0.05. Results: Overall, patient satisfaction was high, with 89.5% of respondents agreeing that the surgical care received was excellent. Non-Saudi participants reported significantly higher satisfaction (median 57.0, IQR: 53.0–64.0) compared to Saudi participants (median 54.0, IQR: 49.0–59.0; P-value = 0.043). Major surgery patients had higher satisfaction scores (median 56.0, IQR: 50.0–60.0) than those undergoing minor surgeries (median 52.0, IQR: 49.0–58.0; P-value = 0.024). No significant correlation was found between length of hospital stay and satisfaction (r = -0.005, P-value = 0.949). Conclusion: High satisfaction levels highlight strengths in communication and facilities. However, improvements in access to specialists and reduced emergency wait times are needed. Recommendations include clearer communication, improved specialist access, and enhanced interpersonal training for healthcare providers. Expanding these strategies may improve surgical care satisfaction in other regions as well.

Background/Objectives: Necroptosis is a critical process in the pathogenesis of myocardial ischemia–reperfusion injury (MIRI). Tilianin (Til), a natural flavonoid glycoside derived from Dracocephalum moldavica L., exhibits significant therapeutic potential in cardiovascular diseases. However, its efficacy and mechanisms in mitigating necroptosis-induced MIRI remain incompletely understood. This study aimed to elucidate the molecular mechanisms by which Til regulates cardiomyocyte necroptosis to alleviate MIRI. Methods: A rat model of MIRI was established by ligating the left anterior descending coronary artery. Necroptosis in H9c2 cardiomyocytes was induced by oxygen–glucose deprivation/reoxygenation (H/R) combined with Z-VAD-FMK. Myocardial infarct size was assessed using 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC) staining. Histopathological injury in cardiac tissue was examined by hematoxylin–eosin (HE) staining. Fluorescent probes were used to detect reactive oxygen species (ROS) and mitochondria. The molecular mechanics Poisson–Boltzmann surface area (MM-PBSA) method was used to predict the binding energy between Til and RIP3. Furthermore, RIP3 overexpression and knockdown, along with inhibition of the downstream protein CaMKII, were used to further investigate the mechanism. Results: Til treatment significantly reduced MIRI in rats, decreased myocardial infarct size, histopathological injury, and regulated myocardial enzyme levels. Til pretreatment effectively inhibited necroptosis in H9c2 cells induced by H/R and Z-VAD-FMK, as evidenced by reduced necroptosis rates, decreased inflammatory cytokine release, improved mitochondrial function, and suppressed phosphorylation of the necroptosis marker MLKL. Molecular docking and dynamics simulation demonstrated stable binding of Til to RIP3, which was verified through Western blot. The protective effects of Til on necroptosis were reversed by RIP3 overexpression. Furthermore, the CaMKII inhibitor KN93 abolished Til’s effect on mitochondria. Conclusions: Til alleviates MIRI by targeting RIP3 to inhibit the necroptosis pathway and mPTP opening. These findings provide a new therapeutic strategy for MIRI and necroptosis-related diseases.

Baseline <sup>18</sup>F-FDG PET/CT metabolic parameters could predict the prognosis of patients with PTLD after pLT.

Background/Objectives: Stemness has been proposed as a unifying driver of invasion, treatment resistance, and relapse in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC). We synthesized two complementary evidence streams to determine whether higher stemness predicts poorer survival in OSCC: (i) computational stemness signatures derived from transcriptomic/epigenetic data and (ii) tissue cancer stem cell (CSC) immunophenotypes by immunohistochemistry (IHC). Methods: Following PRISMA 2020, we searched PubMed/MEDLINE, Embase, Scopus, and SciELO. Adults with histologically confirmed OSCC were eligible. Primary outcome was overall survival (OS); disease-specific survival (DSS) and recurrence-free survival (RFS) were secondary. Two parallel meta-analyses pooled effects within domains; random-effects restricted maximum likelihood (REML) models were applied. Results: Of 785 records, 11 studies met criteria. For computational signatures (k = 6), higher stemness was associated with poorer OS (pooled HR 2.24, 95% CI 1.61–3.12; I2 ≈ 49%). Sensitivity excluding the single unadjusted Kaplan–Meier (KM)-derived estimate yielded a similar effect (HR 2.13, 95% CI 1.56–2.89). For CSC-IHC (main analysis, k = 2), CSC-positive profiles predicted worse OS (pooled HR 2.01, 95% CI 1.42–2.84; I2 ≈ 0%); results were robust to excluding an internally inconsistent study (single-study HR 2.078). An exploratory sensitivity analysis, including a 1-year HR (different time horizon), increased heterogeneity and was not considered definitive. A functional meta-synthesis converged on epithelial–mesenchymal transition/extracellular matrix remodeling, hypoxia/glycolysis, redox/ferroptosis resistance, and ribosome/rRNA biogenesis, supporting biological plausibility across modalities. Conclusions: Across computational and IHC evidence, stemness consistently portends inferior OS in OSCC, offering a biologically anchored framework for risk stratification and testable therapeutic hypotheses.

Heat strain and dehydration are significant contributors to kidney injury in agricultural workers, highlighting critical public health risks. These findings emphasize the urgent need for interventions to mitigate heat-related health hazards, including workplace protections, hydration strategies, and climate adaptation policies to safeguard vulnerable populations worldwide.

The global prevalence of obesity and diabetes necessitates novel therapeutic interventions. Ketone bodies, particularly beta-hydroxybutyrate (BHB), have emerged as promising agents for metabolic management. This study&nbsp;assessed how effective the efficacy of oral beta-hydroxybutyrate (BHB) supplementation on weight loss and glycemic control in a streptozotocin (STZ; 50 mg/kg, intraperitoneal) mouse model of obesity and diabetes induced by a high-fat diet (HFD, which consists of 45% beef tallow, 35% egg yolk, and 20% commercial food pellets) for 21 days under a 16-hour daily fasting protocol. &nbsp;Male Swiss Webster mice were divided into four groups and orally administered: metformin (0.1 mg/g) (positive control), low-dose BHB (3.75 mg/g), high-dose BHB (7.5 mg/g), and water (negative control). All treatments were administered once daily for 14 days. At the end of the treatment period, parameters evaluated included final body weight, fasting blood glucose (FBG) levels in the tail vein on days 0, 1, 7, and 14, and urinary ketone levels via urine sampling. Results demonstrated that high-dose BHB administration induced a significantly reduced body weight (p &lt; 0.05) and fasting blood glucose levels (p &lt; 0.01), with efficacy comparable to that of metformin. The low-dose BHB group showed&nbsp;a&nbsp;statistically significant improvement in fasting blood glucose (FBG) (p &lt; 0.05) but did not significantly reduce body weight. Critically, urinary ketones remained undetectable, indicating no induction of ketoacidosis. These results suggest that oral BHB supplementation, particularly at higher doses, is a safe and effective strategy for improving metabolic outcomes during fasting in obese and diabetic models, positioning it as a viable adjunct therapeutic option.

ABSTRACT Quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) is essential for monitoring hepatitis delta virus (HDV) RNA, yet assays lack standardization. We aimed to evaluate the performance of three qRT-PCR assays and to assess the impact of a pre-analytical thermal shock procedure. We conducted a comparative study using 206 samples (106 with anti-HDV antibodies and 100 anti-HDV-negative as a control group), which were tested in parallel with three qRT-PCR assays: Vircell, Certest, and Altona. Performance was evaluated for inter-assay agreement (kappa index), quantitative correlation (R²), and bias (Bland-Altman). Altona detected 56 HDV-RNA positive samples, whereas Vircell and Certest detected 55 positive samples. Inter-assay agreement was perfect comparing Vircell vs Certest (agreement = 100%, к = 1.000) and almost perfect comparing Altona with both Vircell and Certest (agreement = 99.5%, к = 0.988). Quantitatively, Vircell and Certest assays showed relevant systematic biases compared to Altona, overestimating viral loads by approximately 0.24 log 10 International Units (IU)/mL (Certest) and 0.33 log 10 IU/mL (Vircell). The correlation with Altona was strong for Certest (R² = 0.864) and moderate for Vircell (R² = 0.793), while the correlation between Certest and Vircell was weaker (R² = 0.720). Thermal shock improved sensitivity in one case (Certest vs Vircell) but increased quantitative variability, worsening the inter-assay correlation (R² = 0.684). In conclusion, all three assays were highly concordant for the qualitative diagnosis of HDV infection, but their quantitative biases prevent their interchangeable use for treatment monitoring. Thermal shock is not recommended for routine monitoring, as a significant compromise in quantitative accuracy and precision outweighs any potential gains in sensitivity. IMPORTANCE This study evaluates three hepatitis delta virus (HDV) RNA quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) assays, crucial for managing the HDV infection, particularly in the setting of new therapies like Bulevirtide, where assessing viral load reduction and accurate monitoring is paramount. We reveal significant quantitative biases among widely used assays, precluding their interchangeable use and risking misinterpretation of treatment response. Furthermore, our systematic assessment of the thermal shock pre-analytical procedure highlights its detrimental impact on quantitative precision, despite modest sensitivity gains. This work provides essential evidence for clinicians and laboratories, guiding assay selection and standardization efforts to optimize HDV diagnosis and patient monitoring.

Iešguđet eallit leat áiggiid čađa leamaš dehálaččat olbmuide geat leat eallán Sámis. Doaibmavuogit, muitalusat, meanut ja giella muitalit dan movt goabbat- ja guđetguimmešvuohta elliiguin lea hábmen olbmuid jurdagiid ja ipmárdusa das makkár obalohkái lea dát áibmu mas mii eallit. Nu maid leat hápmahuvvan ja doalahuvvon njuolggadusat movt mii galggašeimmet meannudit iežamet luonddubirrasiin. Dán artihkkalis leat guorahallojuvvon vierut ja muitalusat vissis elliid birra, makkárat dat leat leamaš ja movt dat sáhttet leat midjiide oahpisteaddjin otná dilis nai. Dás leat válljejuvvon boazu ja beana ovddastit olbmo lagas dehe siidda elliid, ja guovža, goddi ja gumpe fas meahci elliid.

BACKGROUND Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a common neurodegenerative disorder in the elderly population. Non-motor symptoms such as anxiety and depression are often subtle, hindering early detection and intervention, yet they markedly affect quality of life and clinical outcomes. AIM To investigate the prevalence of anxiety and depression in elderly PD patients, identify associated risk factors, and assess their relationship with fatigue severity. METHODS A cross-sectional analysis was conducted in 123 elderly PD patients treated at The Second Rehabilitation Hospital of Shanghai between January 2023 and December 2024. Demographic and clinical data were obtained using standardized questionnaires. Anxiety, depression, and fatigue were assessed using the Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI), Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS), and Fatigue Scale-14 (FS-14), respectively. Binary logistic regression identified risk factors for anxiety and depression, whereas Spearman’s correlation assessed associations with fatigue. RESULTS Anxiety and depression prevalence rates were 64.2% (mean BAI score: 19.59 ± 10.92) and 56.1% (mean GDS score: 12.82 ± 6.37), respectively. The mean FS-14 total score was 9.46 ± 1.89, comprising physical (5.77 ± 1.51) and mental (3.69 ± 1.20) fatigue components. Significant positive correlations were observed between fatigue scores (total, physical, and mental) and both anxiety and depression (all P &lt; 0.05). Univariate analysis revealed statistically significant associations between anxiety/depression and monthly income, disease duration, and disease severity (all P &lt; 0.05). Multivariate logistic regression indicated higher anxiety risk in patients with lower monthly income, prolonged disease duration, advanced disease severity, or multimorbidity. Depression risk was elevated in patients with lower monthly income and severe disease, whereas longer disease duration unexpectedly served as a protective factor. CONCLUSION Elderly PD patients show high rates of anxiety and depression, both of which are significantly correlated with fatigue severity. These findings highlight the importance of psychological monitoring and targeted mental health interventions in PD management among the elderly.

Bilim, teknoloji ve yönetimde yaşanan hızlı değişimler tüm örgütlerde olduğu gibi toplumu eğiten ve geleceği inşa eden toplumdaki en önemli kuruluşlar olan okullarda da yeniliklere ihtiyacı doğurmuştur. Bu doğrultuda en önemli yeniliklerden olan yapay zekâ uygulamaları yönetimi büyük önem taşımaktadır. Yapay zekâ uygulamaları ile insan beyninin düşünmeyi nasıl gerçekleştirdiği, sorunlara çözüm bulurken ne tür bir yöntem çizdiği ve bilgiyi beynin nasıl öğrendiği izlenir. Bu izlem sonucunda karmaşık işlemleri insan beyni gibi çözmek için, akıllı yazılım ile makineye uyarlanan bu sisteme yapay zekâ uygulamaları denir. Eğitimde yenilik yönetimi ve yapay zekâ uygulamalarının rolünü araştırmak amacıyla bu çalışma gerçekleştirilmiştir. Dergipark, Google Akademik, YÖKTEZ ve TR Dizin olmak üzere farklı veri tabanlarında tarama yapılmış, örneklem büyüklüğü 150 makale olarak belirlenmiştir. Sonuç olarak yenilik yönetimi ve yapay zekânın eğitim alanına olumlu etkileri ve eğitim süreçlerini geliştirme potansiyeli bulunmaktadır. Bu sebeple yenilik yönetimi ve yapay zekâ, eğitim ve öğretim alanlarında yok sayılmaması gereken bir öğe olarak nitelendirilebilir.

Las abejas meliponas desempeñan un papel fundamental en la polinización de la flora nativa tropical, aunque sus patrones de forrajeo en ambientes urbanos han sido poco estudiados. En este estudio se evaluó la tasa de visitas florales de abejas meliponas en tres especies de plantas urbanas mediante observaciones estandarizadas. Se detectaron diferencias significativas en la tasa de visitas entre las especies, siendo Euphorbia milii la más visitada, seguida por Tecoma stans y Cordia dentata. La hora del día fue la variable ambiental más influyente, registrándose mayores tasas de visita después del mediodía. Los resultados resaltan la relevancia de las interacciones planta–polinizador en entornos urbanos y subrayan la necesidad de fomentar prácticas de jardinería y educación ambiental que contribuyan a la conservación de polinizadores nativos.

RETRACTION : S.‐H. Dai , Q.‐C. Wu , R.‐R. Zhu , X.‐M. Wan and X.‐L. Zhou , “,” Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine 24 , no. ( 2020 ): 3183 – 3191 , https://doi.org/10.1111/jcmm.14992 . The above article, published online on 23 January 2020 in Wiley Online Library ( wileyonlinelibrary.com ), has been retracted by agreement between the authors; the journal Editor‐in‐Chief, Stefan N. Constantinescu; the Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine; and John Wiley &amp; Sons Ltd. The retraction has been agreed upon following concerns raised by a third party. An investigation determined that Figures 4C, 4D, and elements of Figure 6B, duplicate figures previously published in other articles by a different author group. Due to errors in image management leading to unreliable data, the authors have voluntarily requested retraction. The editors consider the results and conclusions compromised.

Background: The crucial role of physical activity (PA) in public health has long been acknowledged. However,there is a lack of studies examining PA levels in Sylhet, Bangladesh. This study aimed to analyze the patterns of PAamong adolescents in Sylhet. Methods: A descriptive cross-sectional study was conducted, assessing the PA levelsof 250 students aged 14-17 years, attending grades 8, 9, and 10 from two high schools in Sylhet. Data were collectedthrough face-to-face interviews using a semi-structured questionnaire. The study was conducted over a period of sixmonths from September, 2024, to February, 2025. Data were entered and analyzed using SPSS version 25. Results:Physical education (PE) classes had the highest frequency of regular physical activity (52%). However, unstructuredtimes, such as lunch breaks, saw minimal participation in physical exercise. Maximum (70%) students engaged in noexercise during breaks or only took short walks. Sports like football (117) and badminton (179) had relatively higherparticipation rates, whereas activities such as swimming and dancing were less common. Conclusion: The findingsemphasize the need for structured school-based public health programs to promote consistent physical activity. This isparticularly important for older students and females to support their overall health and well-being.

ABSTRACT Group A Streptococcus (GAS) and group C/G Streptococcus (GCS/GGS) species cause bacterial pharyngitis in both adults and children. Occasionally, GAS can cause invasive and severe infections like septicemia, streptococcal toxic shock-like syndrome, and necrotizing fasciitis. Throat culture has remained the gold standard method for diagnosing GAS or GCS/GGS pharyngitis. Methodologically, bacterial cultivation is laborious and time-consuming. For this, nucleic acid-based tests have been developed since they are rapid and have high sensitivity and specificity compared to culture methods. However, only a few molecular methods for the detection of GAS and especially for GCS/GGS in clinical throat swab specimens have been described. This study compares the clinical and analytical performance of a fully automated “sample-to-result” PCR with the gold standard reference method, culture. According to our results, the sensitivity of pooled PCR for GAS, GCS, and GGS was 94.1%, and the specificity was 94.2%. Pooled positive predictive value was 80.0%, and the negative predictive value was 98.5%. These results highlight that PCR is a reliable method, especially for ruling out negative cases due to its high negative predictive value. However, its positive predictive value is lower, meaning there is a higher chance of false positives. A PCR-based method for the diagnosis of pharyngitis would speed up turnaround time (TAT) and automate laboratory processes, especially in locations far away from a central laboratory. Faster TAT with a sensitive and specific method could reduce unnecessary antibiotic use, since currently, clinicians often prescribe antibiotics empirically before final test results. IMPORTANCE Pharyngitis is commonly caused by viruses or by Streptococci, the latter of which can be treated with antibiotics. Rapid differential diagnostics help to reduce unnecessary antibiotic use, as clinicians often initiate empirical treatment before culture results are available. In addition, a shorter turnaround time for laboratory diagnosis may prevent transmission or development of the more severe disease. Diagnosis of streptococcal pharyngitis is commonly done by culture, which requires at least 24 h incubation. The results of our study showed that the fully automated PCR system is a useful and reliable tool for speeding up the diagnosis and would be helpful, especially in locations far away from central laboratories.

Background: Suicidal thoughts and behaviours (STBs) are traditionally framed as arising from mental health problems, however, emerging evidence highlights the importance of social determinants in contributing to suicide risk. We examined STBs and their socioeconomic, psychosocial and clinical correlates in two peri-urban communities in Cape Town. Methods: We conducted psychiatric diagnostic interviews (MINI) at three public-sector facilities (2023-2024). Adults aged ≥18 years, with and without HIV, were recruited in a 2:1 ratio. We examined STB prevalence and associations between past 30-day suicidal ideation and sociodemographic factors, violence exposure, perceived stress, mental disorders, and HIV. Results: We enrolled 613 participants (63.9% female; 65.4% HIV-positive; median age 39). The prevalence of past 30-day suicidal ideation was 14.0%, while 22.2% reported a lifetime suicide attempt. Odds of past 30-day ideation were higher in females (OR 2.07, 95% CI 1.21-3.54), those who had experienced violence in their community (1.93, 1.09-3.41) or family (3.00, 1.55-5.81), those with high perceived stress (4.57, 1.93-10.81), and in those with depression (6.62, 3.39-12.92), post-traumatic stress disorder (6.69, 2.97-15.04), and an alcohol use disorder (2.27, 1.23-4.17). Associations with high perceived stress and community violence persisted after adjustment for mental disorders. HIV and other sociodemographic factors were not significantly associated. Conclusion: STB prevalence was high in peri-urban communities in Cape Town and strongly associated with mental disorders, violence exposure, and perceived stress. These findings underscore the role of structural and psychosocial stressors in shaping suicide risk in low-income communities.

Purpose: Ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) remains a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in intensive care units (ICUs). The effectiveness of prophylactic inhaled amikacin in preventing VAP remains uncertain. This study compared VAP incidence between patients with trauma who received prophylactic inhaled amikacin and those who did not.Methods: We conducted a retrospective, single-center analysis of 66 mechanically ventilated trauma patients admitted to the ICU between May and December 2024. Primary outcomes were infection-related ventilator-associated conditions (IVAC) and microbiologically confirmed VAP. Secondary outcomes included mechanical ventilation duration, ICU and hospital length of stay, and 30-day mortality. Statistical analyses comprised chi-square tests, multivariate logistic regression, and Cox proportional hazards regression with propensity score matching.Results: A total of 66 patients were included: 28 in the prophylaxis group and 38 in the control group. The prophylaxis group demonstrated a higher unadjusted incidence of IVAC (85.71% vs. 55.26%, P=0.02) and VAP (82.14% vs. 44.74%, P&lt;0.01) compared with the control group. However, after adjustment, logistic regression revealed no significant association between inhaled amikacin and increased risk of VAP (odds ratio [OR], 3.00; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.80–12.81; P=0.11) or IVAC (OR, 3.10; 95% CI, 0.71–16.43; P=0.15). Similarly, Cox regression analysis showed no significant effect on VAP (hazard ratio [HR], 1.10; 95% CI, 0.47–2.58; P=0.82) or IVAC (HR, 1.68; 95% CI, 0.78–3.59; P=0.18). Secondary outcomes did not differ significantly between groups.Conclusions: Prophylactic inhaled amikacin neither prevented nor increased IVAC and VAP risk in mechanically ventilated trauma patients, suggesting no meaningful impact on VAP outcomes in this population.

Sesler mekanların kimliğinin bir parçasını oluşturmakta ve fiziksel çevrenin bir bileşeni olarak tanımlanmaktadır. Literatüre bakıldığında yeraltı şehirlerinin özelinde jeolojik ve yapısal çalışmalar yürütülmüş olsa da fiziksel çevrenin önemli bir yönü olan iç mekân akustiğine ilişkin araştırmaların eksik olduğu görülmektedir. Oysaki, yeraltı şehirleri görsel kimliklerinin ötesinde, barındırdıkları akustik özelliklerle de mekânsal hafızanın önemli bir parçasını oluşturur ve bu yönüyle de araştırılmaları önemlidir. Bu bağlamda, Kapadokya bölgesinde yer alan Derinkuyu Yeraltı Şehri hem tarihsel hem de mekânsal özellikleriyle işitsel açıdan özgün bir araştırma sahası sunmaktadır. Bu çalışma, Derinkuyu’nun akustik kimliğini çok boyutlu bir yaklaşımla incelemekte ve doktora çalışması kapsamında yürütülen bir saha araştırmasının ön bulgularını ortaya koymaktadır. Araştırmada, sekiz katlı bu yeraltı kompleksinde yer alan üç farklı iç mekân tipolojisi mimari, ölçüm ve deneyim boyutunda analiz edilmiştir. Alan üzerinde gerçekleştirilen reverberasyon süresi ölçümleri ve duyusal gözlemler aracılığıyla, mekânsal hacmin ve fonksiyonel kullanımın sesin algılanmasına olan etkisi değerlendirilmiştir. Elde edilen bulgular, Derinkuyu’nun yalnızca görsel değil aynı zamanda işitsel bir kültürel miras alanı olarak da değerlendirilmesi gerektiğini ortaya koymaktadır. Bu doğrultuda, akustiğin mekân kimliği üzerindeki rolü vurgulanmakta ve tarihî yapıların korunmasında işitsel çevrenin dikkate alınmasının gerekliliği vurgulanmaktadır.

We emphasize the translational potential of miRNAs as emerging therapeutic modalities and predictive biomarkers for the personalized management of BC.

Background: Syphilis remains a major public health concern in Meghalaya despite the availability of effective diagnostics and treatment. This study aimed to identify behavioral and sociodemographic risk factors associated with syphilis infection among attendees of designated STI/RTI clinics (DSRCs). Methods: A matched case-control study was conducted across six DSRCs between May and June 2023, including 66 confirmed syphilis cases and 263 age-, sex-, and marital status-matched controls. Data on demographics, substance use, sexual behaviour and treatment-seeking were collected using structured interviews. Secondary record-based data (2017-2022) from all DSRCs were analysed to assess district-wise and temporal trends. Results: Most participants were aged 26-35 years (cases: 48.5%; controls: 49.4%) and male (56.1% versus 57.8%). Alcohol use was reported by 56.1% (n=37) of cases and 41.8% (n=110) of controls. Extramarital sexual partnerships were common (72.1% versus 67.9%) and independently associated with syphilis (adjusted OR=2.86; p=0.026). Awareness of STI clinics was low (31.8% versus 35.7%). District-level analysis revealed the highest RPR positivity in East Jaintia Hills (up to 24%), followed by East Khasi Hills (20%) and West Jaintia Hills (9.6%). Conclusions: Extramarital partnerships independently predicted syphilis infection. Strengthening behavioural interventions, partner notification, and district-focused screening is critical to curb transmission.

Obstetric haemorrhage—particularly primary postpartum haemorrhage—remains the leading preventable cause of maternal death worldwide. Despite pharmacological and surgical advances, its incidence remains high in low- and middle-income countries, where limited access to high-quality uterotonics, safe blood products, and multidisciplinary teams increases lethality. This article critically reviews the epidemiology, pathophysiology, and contemporary evidence-based diagnostic and treatment strategies published between 2000 and 2025. The Shock Index (≥ 0.9) is highlighted as an early marker of haemodynamic instability, and the importance of objective blood-loss quantification for activating rapid-response protocols is emphasised. Stepwise management integrates early haemostatic resuscitation, sequential and rational use of uterotonics, administration of tranexamic acid within the first three hours, intra-uterine tamponade, conservative surgical techniques, and—where available—selective arterial embolisation. A prevention bundle centred on active management of the third stage of labour with oxytocin or heat-stable carbetocin reduces postpartum haemorrhage incidence by more than 40 %. Disparities between high- and low-income countries demand systemic interventions that ensure supplies, train personnel, and optimise referral networks. Implementation of standardised obstetric bundles, together with wider availability of haemostatic technologies and universal access to heat-stable uterotonics, constitutes the most effective strategy for achieving the Sustainable Development Goal 2030 targets for maternal-mortality reduction.

Background: This study investigated the association between daily stress, sleep duration, and attention-deficit or hyperactivity problems (ADH) among teenagers and the moderated mediating effect of positive family relationships.Methods: The data of a nationally representative sample of teenagers were analyzed using regression analyses.Results: Daily stress was positively associated with ADH. Sleep duration partially mediated the association between daily stress and ADH. Positive family relationships moderated the mediating effect of sleep duration. Specifically, the mediating effect decreased with increasing levels of positive family relationships.Conclusions: Based on its results, this study discusses ways to intervene in ADH among teenagers.

Background/Objectives: Pes planus is characterized by loss of medial longitudinal foot arch, resulting potentially in dysfunction in balance. Chronic ankle instability (CAI) is related to sensorimotor control deficits. Both of these two musculoskeletal disorders have a diminishing effect on joint proprioception. The present study examined the impact of flatfoot on balance in individuals with CAI. Methods: A total of 28 students (15 men, 13 women; 18–23 years, M = 20.46, SD = 1.07) were assigned to CAI with pes planus (n = 15) or CAI only (n = 13). Balance was assessed using the Y-balance test (YBT) and modified star excursion balance test (mSEBT) in three directions (anterior, posteromedial, and posterolateral), alongside the Cumberland ankle instability tool (CAIT). Group differences were analyzed with independent t tests or Mann–Whitney U tests (α = 0.05). Results: The findings of the study did not show statistically significant differences between the two groups in the balance variable [mSEBT/anterior left foot (t = 0.239, p = 0.865); mSEBT/posteromedial left foot (t = −0.048, p = 0.562); mSEBT/posterolateral left foot (t = 0.164, p = 0.258); mSEBT/anterior right foot (t = −0.433, p = 0.748); mSEBT/posteromedial right foot (t = 0.745, p = 0.606); mSEBT/posterolateral right foot (t = 0.263, p = 0.680); YBT/anterior left foot (U = 96.00, p = 0.93); YBT/posteromedial left foot (U = 94.50, p = 0.87); YBT/posterolateral left foot (U = 96.00, p = 0.93); YBT/anterior right foot (U = 95.50, p = 0.92); YBT/posterolateral right foot (U = 82.50, p = 0.45)]. However, a trend towards significance was found as patients with flatfeet had a weaker performance in balance tests [posteromedial direction of the YBT for the right foot (U = 70.00, p = 0.12)]. Conclusions: Although pes planus did not seem to affect the balance ability of individuals with CAI, future studies should confirm the relationship of pes planus and CAI with a larger group, including variables such as ankle range of motion, muscle strength, and functional activity level. A better understanding of the above relationship may lead to more precise diagnostic processes and more efficient therapies in CAI.

Individuals with T2DM have more severe lumbar trabecular network injury despite a similar BMD to those without T2DM, and the effect of T2DM on LTBL is independent of age and BMD. LTBL may represent a promising imaging marker for detecting early microstructural deterioration in the bone of individuals with diabetes.

Background: Malnutrition remains a significant public health concern among under-five children, particularly in low- and middle-income countries. It includes both undernutrition and the rising issue of overnutrition. The objectives of the study were to assess the nutritional status of children under-five years of age and to identify socio-demographic factors influencing it. Methods: A community-based cross-sectional study was conducted among 255 under-five children. These children were selected by simple random sampling in the rural field practice area of a medical college in southern Karnataka. Anthropometric measurements were taken and nutritional status was assessed using WHO Z-score classifications. Data analysis was carried out using Epi-Info and WHO Anthro Survey Analyser. Associations were assessed using Chi-square and Fisher's exact tests. Results: Out of 255 children, 31.76% (81) were stunted, 20% (51) were underweight and 15.69% (40) were wasted, showing significant undernutrition. Also, 9.02% (23) and 12.55% (32) were overweight/obese by weight-for-length and BMI-for-age, respectively, indicating emerging overnutrition. This reflects the double burden of malnutrition in the group. Stunting was most prevalent among children aged 1 to 2 years. Underweight and wasting were more common in boys. A significant association was noted between socioeconomic status and underweight (p=0.035), with the highest prevalence of malnutrition in Class IV. No significant associations were found between other sociodemographic details and nutritional status. Conclusions: The study reported a high burden of malnutrition, especially stunting and underweight, with an emerging trend of overweight and obesity. Socioeconomic status significantly influenced nutritional outcomes, highlighting the need for a multipronged approach.

Amaç: Bu çalışma, HER-2 pozitif ve HER-2 negatif metastatik Luminal B meme kanseri alt tiplerini klinikopatolojik özellikler, tedavi yanıtları ve sağkalım süreleri açısından karşılaştırmayı amaçlamaktadır. Gereç ve Yöntem: 2010-2024 yılları arasında tanı konulan 130 metastatik Luminal B meme kanseri hastasının retrospektif verileri incelendi. Hastalar HER-2 durumuna göre iki gruba ayrıldı; sağkalım Kaplan-Meier, log-rank testi ve Cox regresyon analiziyle değerlendirildi. Bulgular: ECOG (p&amp;lt;0,001), ER (p=0,001), PR (p=0,046), metastatik 1. sıra tedavi (p&amp;lt;0,001) ve mortalite (p=0,019) değişkenlerinde gruplar arasında anlamlı fark bulundu. Median genel sağkalım HER-2 pozitif grupta 29,66 ay, HER-2 negatif grupta 42,53 ay idi (p=0,082). Sonuç: HER-2 durumuna göre sağkalım farklılıkları istatistiksel anlam taşımamakla birlikte, tedavi yaklaşımları arasında belirgin klinik ayrışmalar saptanmıştır.

El escenario de la educación matemática se encuentra atravesado por cambios paradigmáticos impulsados por avances tecnológicos y transformaciones epistemológicas en la comprensión del conocimiento. El objetivo de esta investigación fue analizar experiencias de estudiantes universitarios venezolanos sobre el desarrollo de la educación matemática y su mediación por tecnologías emergentes. Como metodología, se asumió el enfoque cualitativo, con temporalidad transversal, alcance descriptivo y diseño de campo; tipo estudio de casos de tipo instrumental, con múltiples unidades de análisis. Los sujetos de estudio fueron 7 estudiantes del nivel universitario de una institución privada de Maracaibo, Venezuela. Como instrumento se empleó una entrevista semiestructurada. Los resultados develaron una tendencia hacia la incorporación de tecnologías emergentes en la enseñanza de las matemáticas en Venezuela que está en ascenso, aunque todavía en una etapa preliminar. En conclusión, existe reconocimiento de los beneficios y valor de las tecnologías emergentes en el aprendizaje de matemáticas, subrayando la importancia de mejorar la infraestructura y ofrecer formación pertinente para potenciar su integración de forma sostenible.

Latar Belakang : Menurut World Health Organization (WHO), lebih dari 100 juta Pasangan usia subur (PUS) menggunakan kontrasepsi efektif, terdiri dari 75% metode hormonal dan 25% non-hormonal. Secara global, penggunaan kontrasepsi meningkat dari 89% pada 2019 menjadi 92,1% pada tahun 2020. Di Afrika, 82% penduduk belum menggunakan kontrasepsi, sedangkan di Asia Tenggara, Selatan, dan Barat, pengguna tercatat sebesar 43%. Pada tahun 2021, kontrasepsi modern digunakan oleh 58% di lingkungan kerja dan 57% di pedesaan. Tujuan Penelitian : Diketahuinya hubungan paritas, pengetahuan dan dukungan suami secara simultan dengan penggunaan AKDR di Puskesmas Muaradua Kabupaten Ogan Komering Ulu Selatan tahun 2025. Metode : Survey Analitik dengan pendekatan cross sectional. Populasi dalam penelitian ini adalah semua akseptor KB aktif yang berkunjung ke Puskesmas Muaradua Kabupaten Ogan Komering Ulu Selatan pada bulan Maret tahun 2025 yang berjumlah 525 responden dan sampel yaitu 84 responden dengan menggunakan teknik Accidental Sampling. Pengumpulan data menggunakan data primer. Analisis data menggunakan uji chi-square. Hasil penelitian : Dari hasil analisa Bivariat didapatkan ada hubungan yang signifikan antara paritas (p.value = 0,015), pengetahuan (p.value = 0,014), dan dukungan suami (p.value = 0,009) dengan penggunaan alat kontrasepsi dalam rahim (AKDR) di Puskesmas Muaradua Kabupaten Ogan Komering Ulu Selatan tahun 2025. Kesimpulan: ada hubungan paritas, pengetahuan dan dukungan suami dengan penggunaan AKDR. Saran : Diharapkan Puskesmas dapat meningkatkan edukasi tentang AKDR, khususnya bagi ibu dengan paritas tinggi dan pengetahuan yang kurang, serta melibatkan suami dalam penyuluhan guna meningkatkan dukungan terhadap penggunaan kontrasepsi jangka panjang

GS is an uncommon complication of KD that occurs more often in older children and female patients. Imaging markers of atlantoaxial instability correlate with retropharyngeal crowding and nodal enlargement, while systemic inflammatory indices show limited associations. Early recognition and targeted cervical imaging may aid timely diagnosis and management.

ABSTRACT Innovations in histology and education are widespread. However, the field currently lacks a systematic analysis of trends. Therefore, this study employed bibliometric methods to systematically review research on histology and education, filling a gap in the field and providing a reference for further studies. We retrieved articles related to histology and education from 1900 to 2024 from the Science Citation Index‐Expanded of the Web of Science Core Collection. Data on publication trends, countries, leading institutions, prolific authors, influential journals, co‐cited references, and popular keywords were analyzed using Microsoft Excel 2019, CiteSpace, and VOSviewer. The analysis revealed that a total of 3004 research papers and reviews related to histology and education were published globally (1936–2024). The United States emerged as the core research power in this field. Hortsch, Michael was identified as the most prolific author. The journal “Anatomical Sciences Education” published the highest number of articles. Notably, the current hot topic is artificial intelligence technology. This research provides a comprehensive knowledge map of histology and education. As a current hot technology, artificial intelligence will see further global research in this field focus on how to more organically integrate AI technology into histology education in the future.

Background: Hypertension in pregnancy is one of the complications that increases the risk of low birth weight (LBW) due to impaired placental perfusion. At Bungkal Health Center, cases of hypertension among pregnant women and LBW incidence remain relatively high. This study aims to analyze differences in maternal blood pressure between LBW and non-LBW cases at Bungkal Health Center. Methods: This study employed an analytical observational design with a case–control approach. A total of 94 respondents were included, consisting of 47 mothers who delivered low birth weight infants (case group) and 47 mothers who delivered non–low birth weight infants (control group), selected using simple random sampling. Data were obtained from medical records and analyzed using the Chi-square test and the Independent Sample t-test. Results: The mean birth weight of infants born to mothers with high blood pressure was 2,282.25 grams, whereas infants born to mothers with normal blood pressure had a mean birth weight of 2,857.74 grams. Statistical analysis showed a p-value &lt; 0.001, indicating a significant difference between the two groups. Conclusion: There was a significant difference in birth weight between infants born to mothers with high blood pressure and those born to mothers with normal blood pressure. Pregnant women with hypertension had nearly a 40-fold higher risk of delivering low birth weight infants compared with women with normal blood pressure.

In hospitals with limited resources, chlorine solutions are commonly used for biocleaning. The effectiveness of these solutions depends on the concentration of active chlorine and how they are prepared and stored. A study conducted in six University Hospitals in Benin from 10 March to 11 July 2025 aimed to evaluate the stability of active chlorine and the bactericidal efficacy of chlorine solutions used for disinfecting hospital environments. A total of 103 samples were analyzed using iodometric titration following the AFNOR (Association Française de Normalisation) standard NF EN ISO 7393-3 (2000) and WHO (World Health Organization) recommendations. Bactericidal activity was tested on multi-resistant hospital strains using the germ carrier method based on the standard NF T72-281. The study revealed that 88.4% of the solutions had inadequate active chlorine concentrations. Overall, the bactericidal activity was low, with only 14.6% effectiveness compared to 85.4% ineffectiveness. Ineffectiveness was particularly pronounced against Gram-negative bacilli, with 79.6% ineffectiveness and 20.4% effectiveness. Similarly, Gram-positive cocci showed a high level of ineffectiveness, reaching 84.5%, corresponding to 15.5% effectiveness. A significant association was observed between compliance with active chlorine concentrations and bactericidal effectiveness, with an OR of 42.5 and a p-value below 0.000001. Factors contributing to inefficiency included storage without light protection, use of transparent containers, storage for more than two days, inadequate active chlorine concentration, and incorrect pH levels. These issues compromise hospital disinfection and contribute to the persistence of multi-resistant bacteria in the hospital environment.

Objective: To determine the frequency of the Oxacillinase-48-like gene in Carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae isolates using conventional polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Study Design: Cross-sectional descriptive study. Place and Duration of the study: Clinical Pathology Laboratory of Army Medical College, Pak Emirates Military Hospital (PEMH), in collaboration with the Department of Molecular Biology, National University of Medical Sciences, Rawalpindi, Pakistan, from Nov 22 to Jun 23. Methodology: A total of 266 clinical specimens, including blood, respiratory aspirates, pus, body fluids, and tissue, yielding carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae were analyzed. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing was performed using the Kirby-Bauer disc diffusion method on Mueller-Hinton agar. Detection of the oxacillinase-48-like gene was conducted using conventional PCR. The primers used were forward (5ʹ-GCTTGATCGCCCTCGATT-3ʹ) and reverse (5ʹ-GATTTGCTCCGTGGCCGAAA-3ʹ). PCR products were analyzed using agarose gel electrophoresis. A 281 base pair band was considered positive for the OXA-48-like gene. Results: Out of 266 carbapenem-resistant isolates, 200 tested positive for the oxacillinase-48-like gene, indicating a frequency of 75.18%. The study findings highlight a high prevalence of the OXA-48-like gene among carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae, emphasizing the urgent need for robust infection control strategies and strict implementation of antimicrobial stewardship programs. Conclusion: The frequency of OXA-48-like gene in carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae was 75.1%. Immediate action is required to prevent its spread among high-risk patients, alongside reinforced antimicrobial stewardship efforts.

Background: While clinical tools are useful for assessing certain aspects of treatment, they often fail to capture its overall effect on life satisfaction. The Vestibular Rehabilitation Benefit Questionnaire (VRBQ) serves as an effective instrument for evaluating how vestibular rehabilitation (VR) influences both quality of life and well-being. Aim: The aim of the present study is examine the reliability and the validity of the Turkish Vestibular Rehabilitation Benefit Questionnaire. Material – Methods: The VRBQ was initially translated into Turkish by the study authors, followed by a blind back-translation conducted by a native English speaker. The finalized version was administered to a sample of 220 individuals. To evaluate the questionnaire’s psychometric properties, its internal consistency and construct validity were assessed. Results: Following factor analysis, items 2, 6, and 17 were excluded from the questionnaire due to insufficient factor loadings. The Cronbach’s alpha values for the two dimensions related to symptoms were 0.807 and 0.630, respectively, while the quality-of-life dimension yielded a coefficient of 0.834, indicating strong internal consistency. Evidence for the questionnaire’s ability to detect change was provided by paired samples t-test findings, which identified significant improvements in most items from pre- to post-test, excluding items 17 and 19 (p &lt; 0.05). Conclusion: Findings from this study confirm that the VRBQ is a robust instrument for evaluating outcomes of vestibular rehabilitation.

While all bariatric procedures improve pregnancy outcomes compared to untreated obesity, the choice of procedure for women of reproductive age should carefully consider the balance between metabolic benefits and potential risks to maternal and fetal health. Individualized, procedure-specific approaches to post-surgical care and pregnancy timing are recommended.

PCL plays a critical role in maintaining the stability of the posterior knee joint, highlighting the importance of accurate diagnosis and effective treatment for such injuries. Objectives: To determine the stability of the knee joint in patients with posterior cruciate ligament rupture after the autologous hamstring and braided suture reconstruction. Methods: A Quasi-experimental study was conducted from June 2024 to June 2025 at Shahida Islam Medical Complex. This study included 120 patients with posterior cruciate ligament rupture and was divided into control (group A) and study group (Group B) (n=60 each). Group A underwent single-bundle autologous hamstring reconstruction, while group B underwent the same procedure with an added braided thread treatment. Evaluations were performed both before and after surgery, including assessments of complications, joint mobility, gait analysis, knee joint stability (tested with the KT2000), and knee function as measured by Rasmussen scoring. Results: Group B showed significantly better treatment rates compared to Group A (p&lt;0.05). One year after the surgical operations, Group B exhibited notable improvements in stride speed, joint function, stride length, and Rasmussen scores (p&lt;0.05). The cases also showed significantly reduced gait asymmetry and favorable outcomes from the KT2000 test p&lt;0.05). Conclusions: The combination of autologous reconstruction of the hamstring tendon single bundle by using braided thread enhances clinical outcomes for individuals with PCL tears. This treatment significantly improves joint stability and knee function over the long term, demonstrating its effectiveness as a promising therapeutic option.

Ushbu maqolada insoniyat tarixi davomida koʻplab madaniy va diniy anʼanalar shakllanganligi falsafiy nuqtai nazardan tahlil qilingan. Turli xalqlar orasida diniy va maʼnaviy hamjihatlikning ahamiyati diniy bagʻrikenglikka bogʻliqligi tarixiy misollar yordamida yoritilgan. Shuningdek, diniy bagʻrikenglikning turli eʼtiqod va qarashlarga nisbatan hurmat, tolerantlik va hamkorlik koʻnikmalarini rivojlantirishi, jamiyatda tinchlik va barqarorlikni taʼminlaydigan muhim omil ekanligi taʼkidlangan. Maqsad, yoshlar tafakkuriga diniy va madaniy xilma-xillikka oid tushunchalarni yetkazish va ularni bagʻrikenglik ruhida tarbiyalashdan iborat.

Aim: The determination of the morphological characteristics of the foramen magnum (FM) specific to gender, age and the individual plays an important role in the identification processes in the fields of forensic medicine and anthropology. It also holds an important place in the planning of various surgical approaches, particularly neurosurgery. Therefore, detailed analysis of the anatomical variations of the FM contributes significantly to both anthropology and clinical practice. The aim of our study is to evaluate the shape of the FM according to age and gender using three-dimensional (3D) images of the skull. Methods: In our study, the CT data of the skull from 250 men and 250 women aged 20-69 were orthogonally aligned in the horizontal, sagittal and coronal planes using the 3D MPR (Multiplanar Reformat) tool. 3D skull images were obtained from the CT slices. The individuals in our study were divided into five different age groups: 20-29, 30-39, 40-49, 50-59 and 60-69 with 100 individuals (50 men, 50 women) in each age group. The morphological classification of the FM was analyzed according to gender and age using the Pearson Chi-Square test. Results: FM was found to have eight different morphological variations: Hexagonal, round, octagonal, egg-shaped, oval, pentagonal, tetragonal and irregular. No statistically significant difference in shape was found between males and females of FM (p&gt;0.05). However, the morphological analysis of FM according to age groups revealed a statistically significant difference (p&lt;0.05). Conclusion: The study found that FM has eight different morphological structures and that this variation shows age-related changes. However, no gender-specific changes were identified. We believe that this result will contribute to the identification studies of clinicians performing surgical procedures in this region and to the science of forensic medicine and anthropology.

Aim: Psoriasis is a chronic skin disease that can occur at any age and generally persists throughout life. Recent studies have shown that psoriasis not only affects the skin but also leads to significant comorbidities. The purpose of this study was to assess the chronic illnesses that accompany psoriasis. Methods: This was a cross-sectional, retrospective study involving 841 psoriasis patients who attended dermatology clinics at Karabuk University Education and Research Hospital between 2017 and 2019. Results: In a total sample of 841 patients, 56.4% (n=474) were female, with an average age of 43.40 years (±17.91). The three most frequent comorbidities observed in adult patients were hypertension (18.8%), hyperlipidemia (18.2%), and diabetes (10.4%).Statistically significant differences were observed between male and female patients. The results of abdominal ultrasonography performed on adult patients revealed a significantly higher prevalence of hepatosteatosis among female patients than among male patients. Conclusions : Significant comorbidity was observed in psoriasis patients. The most common comorbidities were hyperlipidemia, hypertension and diabetes, which are components of metabolic syndrome. A significantly higher rate of comorbidity was observed in female psoriasis patients compared to male patients.

<i>Neisseria meningitidis</i> is a gram-negative organism known to cause invasive bacterial disease including meningitis and sepsis. <i>Neisseria gonorrhoeae</i> is a pathogen in the same genus and causes gonorrhea, a common sexually transmitted infection that often manifests as urethritis. <i>N. meningitidis</i> can also cause urethritis, yet diagnosis is difficult as it is not detectable on routine gonococcal testing. We present a case of a patient with <i>N. meningitidis</i> urethritis, and discuss the epidemiology and approach to diagnosis and treatment of this illness. It is important to keep <i>N. meningitidis</i> in the differential diagnosis for patients with nongonococcal urethritis.

Ushbu maqolada fuqarolik huquqida asossiz boylik orttirish institutining nazariy-huquqiy asoslari, uning milliy qonunchilikdagi oʻrni hamda xorijiy davlatlar tajribasi ilmiy tahlil qilinadi. Asossiz boylik orttirish fuqarolik-huquqiy munosabatlarda adolat prinsipini taʼminlovchi muhim huquqiy mexanizm sifatida namoyon boʻladi. Maqolada Oʻzbekiston Respublikasi Fuqarolik kodeksi normalari asosida asossiz boylik orttirish tushunchasi, uning vujudga kelish shartlari va huquqiy oqibatlari yoritiladi. Shu bilan birga, Rossiya Federatsiyasi, Germaniya, Fransiya va Angliya qonunchiligida mazkur institutning tartibga solinishi qiyosiy-huquqiy tahlil qilinadi. Tadqiqot jarayonida formal-yuridik, qiyosiy-huquqiy va tizimli tahlil usullaridan foydalanildi. Ilmiy tahlil natijasida milliy qonunchilikda asossiz boylik orttirishga oid ayrim normalarni takomillashtirish zarurati asoslantirildi hamda xorijiy tajribadan foydalanish boʻyicha amaliy takliflar ishlab chiqildi. Maqola xalqaro ilmiy jamoatchilik uchun ahamiyatli boʻlib, fuqarolik huquqi sohasida ilmiy tadqiqotlar olib borayotgan olimlar, tadqiqotchilar va amaliyotchi yuristlar uchun manba sifatida xizmat qiladi.

Abstract Background OnabotulinumtoxinA (BoNT‐A) is an established preventive treatment for chronic migraine but involves 31 to 40 injections per session, often causing discomfort and post‐procedural headaches. Remote electrical neuromodulation (REN) is a noninvasive therapy with efficacy in migraine treatment via conditioned pain modulation but has not been evaluated for procedural pain. This study evaluated REN's effectiveness in reducing acute procedural pain and postprocedural headache associated with BoNT‐A injections. Methods This was an investigator‐initiated single‐center, randomized, single‐blind, sham‐controlled crossover study enrolled 80 adults (aged 22 to 74 years) with chronic migraine undergoing routine BoNT‐A treatment. Each participant received one injection session without a device, followed by sessions using active REN and sham in randomized order. REN was applied to the upper arm 10 min prior to injections and removed after injection completion. Pain intensity was measured using a visual analog scale (0 to 100) at pre‐procedure, intra‐procedure, and post‐procedure time points. The primary outcome was procedural pain intensity, and secondary outcomes included post‐procedural headache incidence and adverse events. Due to clear benefit, the study was terminated early based on predefined stopping criteria. Results Final analysis of 60 participants (mean age 48.0 years; 49/60, 82% female) demonstrated that pre‐procedural pain levels were not significantly different between baseline and the active REN or sham ( p &gt; 0.999 and p = 0.485, respectively). However, during and after BoNT‐A administration, the active REN group reported significantly lower pain scores compared to both the sham and baseline conditions. At intra‐procedure, the REN group experienced a mean pain reduction of 15.0 points ( p &lt; 0.001), and at post‐procedure experienced a 19.1‐point reduction ( p &lt; 0.001). Sham treatment did not result in significant pain reduction compared to baseline ( p &gt; 0.999 for both intra‐procedure and post‐procedure). Additionally, REN lowered the incidence of headache as an adverse event, with only 15% (8/52) of participants experiencing post‐procedural headache compared to 55% (29/53) in the sham group and 39% (23/59) at baseline (odds ratio = 0.28, 95% confidence interval: 0.10 to 0.69, p = 0.008). No additional adverse events were reported. Conclusions REN significantly reduces procedural pain and post‐procedural headache associated with BoNT‐A injections for chronic migraine and may serve as a noninvasive, easily implemented pain management strategy for acute procedural pain. REN represents a promising approach to improving patient comfort during routine migraine treatment as well as reducing post‐procedural headache.

Introducción: el agua usada para abastecimiento humano puede contener concentraciones altas de algunos contaminantes químicos riesgosos para la salud como son: manganeso, hierro y nitritos, cuya incorporación puede darse por causas naturales o antrópicas. Para su remoción se requiere el uso de tecnologías avanzadas que coadyuvan con el tratamiento convencional. Objetivo: analizar la eficiencia del proceso de adsorción con carbón activado granular de origen vegetal, para diferentes espesores de lecho con agua cruda con los contaminantes químicos enunciados, en concentraciones superiores al máximo permisible en la normativa vigente en Colombia para agua potable. Materiales y métodos: se utilizó un dispositivo de tubería plástica con diámetro interno de 67,45 mm que contiene el carbón activado vegetal granular, por donde se hicieron pasar las muestras de agua a una tasa de 14 m³/m²-día, correspondiente a la máxima en filtración convencional lenta con lecho simple según la normativa nacional vigente, tomándose la concentración inicial y final de cada uno de los contaminantes químicos en el agua, para calcular la eficiencia de remoción para diferentes espesores del lecho. Resultados: los resultados obtenidos arrojaron que el carbón activado granular funciona para remoción de manganeso, hierro y nitritos, hasta ciertos niveles de concentración en el agua, siendo útil su uso en el tratamiento del agua para consumo humano.

Neoantigen-based immunotherapies harness somatic mutations as tumor-specific targets and represent a major advance in personalized cancer treatment. Since neoantigens are presented exclusively on cancer cells, they enable highly selective T-cell recognition with minimal off-tumor toxicity. Neoantigen vaccines are rapidly emerging as a versatile class of personalized cancer immunotherapies designed to prime tumor-specific T cells by targeting somatic mutations unique to each patient’s tumor. Multiple types of neoantigen vaccines, using peptide, mRNA, and DNA, have shown feasibility, safety, and immunogenicity across diverse solid tumors. Emerging comparative data indicate that the vaccines using peptide-pulsed dendritic cells (DCs) elicit higher per-epitope CD8+ T cell responses than mRNA-based vaccines, likely due to more efficient class I presentation of synthetic peptides and ex vivo-loaded DCs. In contrast, mRNAs, despite their capacity of targeting multiple neoantigen peptides simultaneously, often induce CD4+-dominant responses due to immunodominance patterns during antigen processing. Recent clinical trials in melanoma, glioblastoma, pancreatic cancer, and other types of cancer have demonstrated not only robust immune activation but also encouraging relapse-free outcomes when administered in adjuvant settings. Treatment timing strongly influenced immune responsiveness; patients with early-stage disease or those vaccinated after surgical resection generally exhibit more preserved systemic immunity and greater vaccine-induced T cell expansion compared to those with advanced disease. Future progress will rely on improved neoantigen prediction, including incorporation of post-translationally modified antigenic targets and acceleration of manufacturing pipelines to ensure timely, personalized vaccine delivery. Collectively, neoantigen vaccines offer substantial promise for integration into next-generation cancer treatment strategies.

В статье исследуются правовые, экологические и институциональные основы рационального использования и охраны земель лесного фонда в Республике Казахстан и Республике Узбекистан. Проведён сравнительно-правовой анализ национальных систем регулирования в контексте международных стандартов устойчивого лесопользования, закреплённых в документах ФАО, Конвенции о биологическом разнообразии, Парижском соглашении по климату и Повестке дня XXI века. Отмечается, что рациональное использование земель лесного фонда является ключевым принципом устойчивого развития и экологической безопасности, обеспечивающим баланс между экономическими интересами и сохранением природных экосистем. В статье раскрываются особенности правового режима земель лесного фонда, формы собственности, компетенция государственных органов, механизмы мониторинга и контроля, а также вопросы ответственности за нарушение природоохранных норм. Подчёркивается, что Казахстан и Узбекистан стремятся внедрять цифровые инструменты (ГИС-системы, спутниковое наблюдение) для оценки состояния лесов, в последнее годы также сосредоточены на восстановлении деградированных территорий, в том числе на дне бывшего Аральского моря, и формировании зелёного пояса в аридных зонах. Сделан вывод о важности гармонизации законодательства Казахстана и Узбекистана с международными экологическими стандартами, что позволит повысить эффективность правовой охраны лесных земель, обеспечить их рациональное и воспроизводящее использование, а также укрепить природоохранную политику в Центрально-Азиатском регионе.

Aim: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disease characterized by beta-amyloid and tau accumulation, leading to memory loss and impairment in daily life. It is more common in women. Considering this difference, the current research explored the hereditary predisposition through examining estradiol (E2) levels and the rs2228480 and rs2295190 polymorphisms in the ESR1 gene in women with AD. Material and Methods: The study included 66 women diagnosed with AD and 62 women without any disease. E2 levels were measured in plasma samples from the participants using the electrochemiluminescence immunoassay (ECLIA) method. Genotyping of the rs2228480 and rs2295190 polymorphisms in ESR1 was performed in DNA samples isolated from whole blood using RT-PCR and TaqMan hydrolysis probes. Results: For the rs2228480 polymorphism, patients with the GA and AA genotypes were found to have an increased risk in women with AD compared to those with the GG genotype (OR = 3.1; 95% CI: 1.33–6.82; p = 0.007). However, no significant difference was found in the genotype distribution of the rs2228480 polymorphism between female AD patients and controls. Furthermore, no difference was observed between the study groups in terms of E2. Conclusion: We believe that there is a significant association between the ESR1 rs2228480 polymorphism and AD; therefore, this polymorphism may play a role in increasing the risk of developing AD. However, comprehensive studies with larger cohorts of women are needed to obtain more definitive data.

Giriş: Görme yetisi, postural kontrolün sürdürülebilmesinde önemli bir rol oynar Amaç: Çalışmamızın amacı farklı seviyelerde doğuştan görme kaybı olan ve normal görme yetisine sahip çocuklarda, statik CoP (Center of Pressure) salınımı ile dinamik plantar temas alanlarındaki tepe kuvvet torklarının karşılaştırılması ve bu parametreler arasındaki ilişkilerin incelenmesidir. Yöntem: Çalışmaya 7-14 yaş aralığında olan 68 çocuk dahil edildi ve normal gören, az gören ve total kör olarak 3 gruba ayrıldı. Statik CoP değerlerinin ve dinamik tepe kuvvet torklarının elde edilmesi amacıyla taşınabilir AS Ayak Tarama (Analiz Sistem®, İstanbul, Türkiye) sistemi kullanıldı. Bulgular: Çocukların yaş, vücut ağırlığı, boy uzunluğu, beden kütle indeksi, cinsiyet ve dominant ekstremite dağılımlarının benzer olduğu görüldü (p&amp;gt;0,05). Statik ayakta duruşta gruplar arası karşılaştırmalarda CoP toplam yol uzunluğu (path length) değeri hariç (p=0,002) diğer sonuçlar açısından grupların benzer olduğu görüldü (p&amp;gt;0,05). Dinamik olarak ölçülen tepe kuvvet tork değerlerinin dominant ve non-dominant alt ekstremitelerde üç grup arasında benzer olduğu bulundu (p&amp;gt;0,05). Normal görenlerde ise CoP path length değerlerinin dominant ve non-dominat ayağın 1. metatarsal alanı, orta ayak ve topuk medialinden elde edilen tepe kuvvet torkları ile negatif yönde ve orta kuvvette ilişkisi olduğu bulundu (p&amp;lt;0,05). Sonuç: Görme engelli çocuklar, statik postural kontrol sırasında normal gören akranlarına kıyasla daha fazla salınım göstermelerine rağmen, dinamik plantar kuvvet dağılımında anlamlı bir fark bulunmamıştır. Statik ölçüm sonuçları ile dinamik tepe kuvvet tork değerleri arasındaki zayıf–orta ilişki, postural kontrolün sağlanması için geliştirilen bir strateji gibi görünmektedir. Bu durum, görsel girdi eksikliğinin denge mekanizmaları üzerinde etkili olduğunu göstermektedir.

Neoadjuvant chemo-radiotherapy is the standard of care for patients with locally advanced rectal cancer. However, certain patients are ineligible for chemotherapy due to clinical contraindications such as active infections. Although neoadjuvant therapy remains the preferred approach, guidelines are limited for patients who cannot receive combined treatment. The present report describes a case in which radiotherapy alone, initiated with palliative intent, enabled complete surgical resection. A 46-year-old male patient presented with fever and proctalgia. Imaging revealed a large rectal mass associated with an ischiorectal abscess. Biopsy confirmed T4bN1 rectal adenocarcinoma. Chemotherapy was contraindicated due to ongoing infection; therefore, a diverting colostomy was performed. Short-course radiotherapy led to marked tumor regression. Subsequent pelvic exenteration achieved complete tumor removal. Postoperative wound dehiscence was managed successfully with vacuum-assisted closure therapy. No recurrence was observed on follow-up. The current case illustrates that radiotherapy alone may serve as a bridge to curative surgery in patients unfit for chemo-radiotherapy. The use of 3D reconstruction markedly improved preoperative planning and facilitated precise surgical resection. Additionally, perineal closure with Vicryl mesh and omental interposition minimized postoperative complications. In conclusion, in selected patients with contraindications to total neoadjuvant therapy, radiotherapy alone may be a feasible alternative to enable radical resection. Advanced surgical planning with 3D modeling can enhance outcomes in complex pelvic surgery.

GM-10395 improves systemic glucose and lipid homeostasis by restoring insulin sensitivity via PDK4 inhibition. These results support GM-10395 as a promising oral therapeutic candidate for insulin resistance in T2DM.

Amaç: Bu sistematik derleme, 18-25 yaş arası genç erişkinlerde obezitenin kardiyovasküler risk faktörleri üzerindeki etkisini inceleyen ulusal ve uluslararası literatürü analiz etmeyi amaçlamaktadır. Yöntem: PRISMA 2020 kılavuzuna uygun olarak PubMed, Web of Science, Scopus, DergiPark ve TR Dizin gibi veri tabanlarında 2013-2025 yılları arasında yayımlanmış Türkçe ve İngilizce yayınlar taranmıştır. Dahil etme ve hariç tutma kriterlerine göre seçilen 40 çalışma sistematik olarak değerlendirilmiştir. Bulgular: Dahil edilen çalışmaların çoğunda obezitenin hipertansiyon, dislipidemi ve diğer kardiyovasküler risk faktörleriyle pozitif ilişki gösterdiği bulunmuştur. Hipertansiyon, en sık bildirilen kardiyovasküler risk faktörüdür. Türkiye’den yapılan çalışmalar da gençlerde artan obezite ve buna bağlı risklere işaret etmektedir. Sonuç: Obezite, genç erişkinlerde kardiyovasküler hastalık riskini artıran önemli bir faktördür. Erken tanı ve müdahale stratejilerinin geliştirilmesi, toplum sağlığı açısından kritik öneme sahiptir.

Purpose: This study aimed to assess the potential role of large language models in the postoperative management of lower lid blepharoplasty patients. Methods: This study employed a cross-sectional design to evaluate the content validity of ChatGPT-4’s responses to common postoperative concerns following lower lid blepharoplasty: bleeding, diplopia, dry eyes, pain, lower lid retraction, and bruising/hematoma/orbital hemorrhage. Twelve American Society of Ophthalmic Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery physicians graded the responses for clinical accuracy on a 5-point Likert scale and assessed the appropriateness of management recommendations. Flesch Reading Ease scores and Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level were generated to assess readability. The Patient Education Materials Assessment Tool was utilized to evaluate understandability and actionability of each response. Results: Average accuracy grades for the 6 responses ranged from 4.33 to 4.67 out of 5, with an overall average of 4.50 ± 0.63. The proportion of graders who deemed ChatGPT-4’s patient management recommendations appropriate ranged from 75.0% to 100% across the 6 responses. Flesch Reading Ease scores ranged from 28.9 to 50.2, with Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level scores ranging from grade 9.4 to 13.4 for reading level. The average Patient Education Materials Assessment Tool understandability score was 91.67 ± 0.52%, while all 6 responses received an actionability score of 60%. Conclusions: ChatGPT-4 showed promise as a supportive tool for postoperative care following lower lid blepharoplasty, with generally accurate and appropriate responses. However, further refinement is needed before it can be considered a reliable clinical resource. Ongoing physician involvement in the development and evaluation of medical AI will be critical to ensuring these technologies are safe, accurate, and capable of meaningfully enhancing patient care.

Kutsal kitaplarda geçen sözler ile o kitaplara inananların nasıl davranması gerektiği belirlenir. İnananlardan beklenen davranış değişikliği bazen metinde açıkça beyan edilir bazen de hikâyeler üzerinden ifade edilir. Bu durum apokrif Yudit ve Ester kitapları için de geçerlidir. Yahudi kutsal kitaplarındaki hikâyelerde baş kahramanlar genellikle erkektir. Ancak apokrif Yudit ve Ester kitaplarında kadın karakterler baş kahramandır. Üstelik Yudit ve Ester isimli kadınlar, sergiledikleri fedakârlık ve gösterdikleri kahramanlık sayesinde İsrail halkını katliamdan kurtarmışlardır. Kutsallık özelliği taşımayan bir roman dahi okuyucusunu etkileyebilme potansiyeline sahiptir. İnananlar için kutsal metinler bağlayıcı, güdüleyici ve belirleyicidir. Bu sebeple okuyucusu üzerindeki etkisi açısından Yudit ve Ester kitaplarının bütüncül bir bakışla ele alınıp Psiko Fenomenolojik yöntemle tasvir edilmesinin ve ana tema üzerinden tipolojik olarak tasnif edilmesinin önemli olduğu düşünülmektedir. Bu bağlamda, apokrif metinlerde anlatılanlar çerçevesinde Yudit ve Ester karakterleri arasındaki benzerliklerin ve farklılıkların vurgulanması, kadının toplumsal konumu üzerinden kadın kahramanın işlevinin belirlenmesi ve anlatılan hikâyelerin Yahudi sosyal bilişi üzerindeki etkisinin değerlendirilmesi amaçlanmıştır. Sonuç olarak apokrif metinlerde anlatılan hikâyeler üzerinden bazı örtülü mesajların verildiği ve Yudit ile Ester’in davranışları örnek gösterilerek galip gelmek için savaşmaktan başka yolların da olabileceğinin ifade edildiği tespit edilmiştir.

La inteligencia artificial (IA) ha sido una herramienta recurrente en la actualidad debido al avance científico y tecnológico de la sociedad, por ende, una correcta aplicación puede traer beneficios sustanciosos en los entornos educativos, aprovechando esta premisa la presente investigación tiene como objetivo demostrar los resultados positivos de la aplicación de la IA en las cátedras de maestría y doctorado del Instituto de Estudios Superiores de la red Iberoamericana de Academias de Investigación campus virtual Hidalgo. Para efectos de investigación se utiliza el método hermenéutico debido a que se pretende describir el fenómeno que se estudia. Los resultados demuestran que el uso de la IA en las sesiones de clase trae aspectos positivos en los estudiantes; concluyendo que éstas favorecen la construcción del conocimiento crítico de los alumnos.

Purpose: This study aims to investigate the distribution of payments made to oculofacial plastic surgeons who are members of the American Society of Ophthalmic Plastic and Reconstructive Surgeons, and examine the regularity of financial relationships between industries and oculofacial plastic surgeons. Methods: This analysis included all American Society of Ophthalmic Plastic and Reconstructive Surgeons fellow members listed in the online directory. Annual statistical data were obtained from the Open Payments Database, and all general payments distributed to oculoplastic surgeons were recorded. Data are summarized by company and amounts distributed to the member. The main outcome is the cumulative payments made by the highest 3 individual industry companies to oculoplastic surgeons using data available from 2021 to 2023. Secondary outcomes looked at payments to leadership positions within the American Society of Ophthalmic Plastic and Reconstructive Surgeons. Results: Six hundred twenty-seven surgeons received $13,069,190.03 over 6,831 payments. The average payment was $1,913.22, while the median payment was $117.12. The top 10 companies contributed a total of $11,540,952.07 (88.3%) of payments while the top 20 surgeons were paid $9,210,203.88 (70.5%) of all contributions. The top 3 companies contributed $9,088,333.48 (69.5%) of payments. In the $10,000 to $99,999 category, Horizon contributed $2,145,840.48 to 69 surgeons, while Galderma and Allergan contributed $113,355.12 to 3 surgeons and $298,972.96 to 11 surgeons, respectively. Between $1,000 and $9,999, Horizon made payments totaling $298,331.84 to 80 surgeons, Galderma contributed $24,289.64 to 7 surgeons, and Allergan contributed $72,768.35 to 27 surgeons. Fifty-six program directors took part in training fellows in oculofacial plastic surgery. The total payment volume for odd-year programs was $2,549,997.64 with an average of $87,930.95 and median of $6,841.28. The total for even-year programs was $1,511,807.29 with an average and a median of $55,992.86 and $1,326.70, respectively. Thirty-three members of the American Society of Ophthalmic Plastic and Reconstructive Surgeons’ current or past 10-year executive committee/board of directors were paid $3,975,434.02, with an average payment of $120,467.70 and a median payment of $3,706.88. Conclusions: The reporting of open payments to providers is important in providing transparency between physicians and industry. There exists a great discrepancy in the distribution of industry payment within oculofacial plastics, showing a very strong apical dominance with relatively few surgeons receiving a higher number of payments, larger total reimbursements, and from relatively few companies.

<title>Abstract</title> <bold>Introduction</bold> : Toxocariasis is documented as one of the neglected parasitic infections globally. Exposure is highest where sanitation is poor and access to health care is limited. In Ghana, similar conditions exist in many rural and peri-urban communities. This study assessed the prevalence and determinants of toxocariasis in humans and dogs in Ghana. <bold>Methods</bold> : A cross-sectional study was conducted in humans and dogs drawn from two regions of Ghana. Human sera were tested for anti- <italic>Toxocara</italic> antibodies using serological assays, while faecal samples of dogs were analyzed using molecular methods <bold>Results</bold> : Human <italic>Toxocara</italic> seroprevalence was 14.5% (95% CI: 11.4–17.5). Infection was highest in children aged 6–15 years (23.9%, 95% CI: 16.7–31.1) and lowest in the 16–30-year group (4.5%, 95% CI: 0.6–8.3). Males (18.6%, 95% CI: 13.9–23.3) and rural residents (27.5%, 95% CI: 20.6–34.4) showed higher infection. Logistic regression showed that being male increased the odds of infection (AOR = 2.06; 95% CI: 1.22–3.48), living in a rural area (AOR = 4.13; 95% CI: 2.47–6.92) and having no formal education increased the likelihood of infection. Among dogs, the overall prevalence was 56.1% (95% CI: 51.4–60.7). <italic>T. canis</italic> was the dominant species (87.9%), while <italic>T. cati</italic> accounted for 12.1%. Young dogs were much less likely to be infected than puppies (AOR = 0.18; 95% CI: 0.10–0.30). Foreign-breed dogs had lower odds of infection than local breeds (AOR = 0.26; 95% CI: 0.10–0.68). <bold>Conclusion</bold> : The study reports on the burden of <italic>Toxocara</italic> infections in both humans and dog populations. Children, males, rural residents, and individuals with no education were identified as risk groups. In dogs, puppies and local-breeds were found to be key reservoirs, highlighting their key role in transmission dynamics. The findings underscore the importance of dog deworming, hygiene education and One Health approaches to reduce the risk of transmission. Herein, we report for the first time of <italic>Toxocara</italic> <italic>cati</italic> infections in dogs in Ghana.

Bilindiği gibi belâgat; meânî, beyân ve bedî‘ ilimlerinden oluşmaktadır. Bu üçlü tasnifin temellerini Sekkâkî (ö. 626/1229) atsa da Kazvînî (ö. 739/1338) tarafından sistematize edilmiştir. Sekkâkî ve Kazvînî öncesi bu ilimlerin isimlendirme noktasında belli bir standartının olmadığını ve dönem dönem değişiklik arz ederek birbirlerinin yerine kullanıldığını görmekteyiz. Meânî, beyân ve bedî‘ ilimlerinin tanımları Kazvînî’yle beraber bir çerçeveye oturmuş, müteâkiben gelen hiçbir âlim bundan müstağni kalamamıştır. Daha doğrusu gerek klasik gerek modern dönem belâgat âlimleri Kazvînî’nin tanımını büyük oranda sürdürmüştür. Bu tanımlarda belâgat ile meânînin çok benzerlik gösterdiği dikkat çekmektedir. Meânînin yanı sıra beyân ve bedî‘ ilimleri de belâgatın bir dalıdır. Bedî‘ ilminin meânî ve beyânın tamamlayıcısı olduğu düşünüldüğünde belâgat târifinin onu içermemesi anlaşılabilir. Fakat beyânı kapsamadığı izlenimi vermesi karışıklığa neden olmaktadır. Çalışmada bu husus ele alınıp netleştirilecektir.

MM-AXLNet, which integrates multiparametric dual-region MRI with report information through dual-region contrastive learning, enables the accurate preoperative prediction of ALNM in breast cancer, facilitating clinical treatment decision-making.

Objectives: Despite the increasing scientific evidence regarding the application of Cranberries in dentistry, a comprehensive understanding of their potential benefits, active constituents, and mechanisms of action remains lacking. Consequently, this narrative review aims to meticulously analyze and consolidate the existing scientific literature on the utilization of Cranberries for the prevention and treatment of oral diseases. Materials and Methods: Electronic databases (PubMed, Scopus, and Web of Science) were searched up to October 2025. This review included in vitro, in vivo, and clinical research studies. A two-phase selection process was carried out. In phase 1, two reviewers independently screened titles and abstracts to identify potentially eligible studies. In phase 2, the same reviewers performed the full-text assessments of the eligible articles. Results: Among the 93 eligible articles, most assessed Cranberry use in Cariology (n = 28) and Periodontics (n = 26). Biofilm and microbial virulence factors (n = 46) were the most frequently studied topics. Cranberry extract (n = 32) and high-molecular-weight non-dialyzable material (NDM) (n = 23) were the most evaluated Cranberry fractions. Overall, Cranberry-derived compounds were identified as non-toxic and demonstrated promising antimicrobial activity against dental caries-related microorganisms in preclinical studies (n = 20). Regarding periodontal and peri-implant diseases, Cranberry demonstrated host immune modulator effects, counteracting the inflammatory and destructive mechanisms (n = 8). Additionally, Cranberries presented benefits in reducing the inflammation associated with periodontal disease and temporal mandibular joint lesions (n = 1). Regarding dental erosion, Cranberry inhibited dentin erosion (n = 4); however, no effect was observed on enamel lesions (n = 2). As an antioxidant agent, Cranberry showed effectiveness in preventing dental erosion (n = 18). Beyond that, Cranberry neutralized reactive oxygen species generated immediately after dental bleaching, enhancing bond strength (n = 2) and counteracting the oxygen ions formed on the tooth surface following bleaching procedures (n = 3). In osteoclastogenesis assays, A-type proanthocyanidins inhibited bone resorption (n = 1). In osteogenic analysis, preservation of hydroxycarbonate apatite deposition and an increase in early and late osteogenic markers were observed (n = 2). Conclusions: Cranberry bioactive compounds, both individually and synergistically, exhibit substantial potential for diverse applications within dentistry, particularly in the prevention and management of oral and maxillofacial diseases. This review provides insights into the plausible incorporation of Cranberries in contemporary dentistry, offering readers an informed perspective on their potential role.

Background/Objectives: There is no definitive consensus regarding the effects of melatonin on cardiometabolic risk factors (CMRFs). This systematic review and dose–response meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) evaluated the impacts of melatonin supplementation on CMRFs, including anthropometric, lipid, glycemic, inflammatory, oxidative, and liver function parameters. Methods: A systematic search across multiple databases retrieved 63 eligible RCTs published up to October 2025. Results: This random-effects meta-analysis indicated that melatonin supplementation significantly reduced hip circumference (weighted mean difference (WMD): −1.18 cm, 95% confidence interval (CI): −2.28, −0.08), systolic blood pressure (WMD: −2.34 mmHg, 95% CI: −4.13, −0.55), fasting blood glucose (WMD: −11.63 mg/dL, 95% CI: −19.16, −4.10), low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (WMD: −6.28 mg/dL, 95% CI: −10.53, −2.03), total cholesterol (WMD: −6.97 mg/dL, 95% CI: −12.20, −1.74), C-reactive protein (WMD: −0.59 mg/L, 95% CI: −0.94, −0.23), malondialdehyde (WMD: −1.54 μmol/L, 95% CI: −2.07, −1.01), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (WMD: −1.61 pg/mL, 95% CI: −2.31, −0.90), interleukin-6 (WMD: −6.43 pg/mL, 95% CI: −10.72, −2.15), and alanine aminotransferase (WMD: −2.61 IU/L, 95% CI: −4.87, −0.34). Supplementation with melatonin substantially increased serum total antioxidant capacity (WMD: 0.15 mmol/L, 95% CI: 0.08, 0.22) and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (WMD: 2.04 mg/dL, 95% CI: 0.50, 3.57). No significant effects of melatonin were observed on body weight, waist circumference, body fat percentage, body mass index, fasting insulin, homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance, hemoglobin A1c, triglycerides, diastolic blood pressure, aspartate aminotransferase, or gamma-glutamyl transferase. Conclusions: Melatonin supplementation significantly ameliorated multiple CMRFs.

Bu araştırmada, ortaokul Türkçe dersinde öğrencilerin konuşma becerisini geliştirmek için gerçekleştirilen etkinliklere katılma durumları ve bu çerçevede konuşma etkinliklerinde karşılaşılan sorunların tespit edilmesi amaçlanmıştır. Araştırma iki konuşma etkinliği üzerinden yürütülmüştür. Bu amaçla iki konuşma etkinliği tasarlanmıştır. Hazırlanan konuşma etkinlikleri iki haftada ve dört ders saatinde uygulanarak tamamlanmıştır. Bu araştırma, nitel araştırma yöntemi kapsamında durum çalışması deseni tercih edilerek yürütülmüştür. Araştırmada yer alan örneklem amaçlı olarak seçilmiştir. Araştırmanın çalışma grubunu Sivas ilinde bir devlet okulunda altıncı sınıfta eğitim gören 9 erkek, 10 kız olmak üzere toplamda 19 öğrenci oluşturmaktadır. Araştırmada veriler; yarı yapılandırılmış ön görüşme formundan, çalışma kağıtlarından, gözlem notlarından yararlanılarak elde edilmiş ve tablo şeklinde verilmiştir. Elde edilen verilerden çalışma yaprakları betimsel analiz ile yarı yapılandırılmış ön görüşme formları ve gözlem notları içerik analizi yoluyla incelenmiştir. İncelenen veriler yorumlanırken kod ve temaya uygun olan katılımcı ve araştırmacı ifadeleri doğrudan alıntı yapılarak verilmiştir. Konuşma etkinlikleriyle elde edilen verilere göre öğrencilerin etkinliklere katılma da isteksiz olduğu, etkinlikleri zoraki yaptığı gözlenmiştir. Etkinlikler sırasında öğrencilerin en sık karşılaştığı konuşma sorunları; tahtaya çıkmakta isteksizlik, konuşma esnasında gülme ve arkadaşını güldürme, konuşma esnasında heyecanlanma, ortam, unutma, beden dilinin verimli kullanamama, göz temasından kaçınma ve süre olarak belirlenmiştir. Konuşma becerisi etkinliklerinde sürekli aynı etkinlikler kullanılmaması ve konuşma becerisi etkinliklerinde öğrencilerin tek düze etkinliklerden kurtulmasının sağlanması gibi önerilerde bulunulmuştur.

Background and Objectives: Female breast cancer (FBC) is an increasing public health concern in Iran, with notable geographic disparities that necessitate comprehensive burden assessments at national and provincial levels. This study presented the national and subnational burden and changes in FBC burden from 2010 to 2021 in Iran in comparison with global data. Materials and Methods: The GBD (2021) data on female BC were extracted from the Global Health Data Exchange (GHDx) query tool. Age-standardized incidence, deaths, prevalence, and adjusted years of life with disabilities (DALYs) rates (per 100,000) of FBC were extracted. Data were extracted globally, by continents, for Iran and its provinces, from 2010 to 2021. Results: Although the global FBC burden indicators remained almost stable, in Iran, there was a nearly twofold rise in incidence and prevalence and notable rises in mortality and DALYs. This study showed significant variation at the provincial level; Tehran, Qom, and Alborz consistently had the highest incidence, prevalence, mortality, and DALY rates, whereas Sistan and Baluchistan, Chahar Mahaal and Bakhtiari, Kohgiluyeh and Boyer-Ahmad, and Zanjan had the lowest rates. During 2010–2021, the provinces of Golestan, Ardebil, Sistan and Baluchistan, West Azarbayejan, Kohgiluyeh and Boyer-Ahmad, and North Khorasan experienced the most increasing trend in BC burden, while Yazd and Semnan showed smaller increases or modest decreases. Conclusions: The rising FBC burden in Iran underscores the urgent need to strengthen cancer registries, expand screening programs, ensure equitable resource distribution, and implement targeted regional interventions focused on modifiable risk factors and early detection to reduce health disparities nationwide.

Çalışmamızın amacı otizm riski olan çocukta erken dönem ergoterapi müdahalesinin otizm riski ve duyusal reaktivite üzerine etkisini incelemektir. Çalışmaya OSB riski olan 25 aylık kız çocuk dahil edilmiştir. Toplam 24 seanslık müdahale uygulanmıştır. Müdahale öncesi ve sonrası duyusal reaktivitenin değerlendirilmesinde Bebeklik Çağı Duyu Profili 2, otizm riskini belirlemek için Değiştirilmiş Çocukluk Otizmi Tarama Ölçeği (M-CHAT) kullanılmıştır. M-CHAT Sonuçlarına göre müdahale öncesi 13/23 puan alarak Otizm riski grubunda yer almaktadır. Müdahale sonrasında 1/23 puan alarak otizm riskinin oradan kalktığı gözlemlenmiştir. Bebeklik çağı duyu profili sonucuna göre dokunma, hareket, oral duyusal işlemleme süreçlerinde uygulanan müdahale sonrasında muhtemel fark aralığından tipik performans; işitsel süreçte kesin farktan muhtemel fark aralığına geçmiştir. Ergoterapi müdahalesi otizm risklerinin ortadan kalkmasında, göz temasını, ortak dikkati, sosyal iletişim ve etkileşimi arttırmada, etkili olduğu sonucuna ulaşılmıştır. Ayrıca duyusal reaktivite üzerinde pozitif etkisi olduğu bulunmuştur. Tüm sonuçlar göz önüne alındığında ergoterapi müdahalesinin OSB riski olan çocuklarda kullanılmasının faydalı olacağını ön görmekteyiz.

Access to specialist veterinary oncology services may be influenced by geographic, demographic, and patient-related factors. Understanding travel burden is important for identifying potential barriers to care and designing more equitable service delivery models. This study quantified the distance travelled by owners seeking specialist oncology care at a UK veterinary teaching hospital and examined whether species, age, breed, and insurance status were associated with travel patterns. A retrospective review was conducted of all dogs and cats presenting to the Oncology Service at the Hospital for Small Animals, University of Edinburgh, between 1 December 2018 and 31 October 2025. Owner postcodes were used to calculate distances from residence to the hospital. Distances were compared across species (dog vs. cat), breed (pure-breed vs. mixed-breed), age (&lt;7 vs. ≥7 years), and insurance status (insured vs. uninsured). A total of 3074 cases were included. In univariate analysis, dogs travelled significantly further than cats (p &lt; 0.001), pure-breed animals travelled significantly further than mixed-breed animals (p &lt; 0.001), and younger animals travelled significantly further than older animals (p = 0.002). In multivariate analysis, species, age, and insurance status were significant, with dogs (p &lt; 0.001), younger animals (p = 0.012), and uninsured animals (p = 0.008) travelling further. These findings highlight potential geographic inequities in access to specialist care and underscore the need for alternative service-delivery strategies to improve accessibility, particularly for cats and younger animals.

Objectives: Micro-atrial fibrillation (micro-AF) represents short, irregular supraventricular tachyarrhythmia episodes that may precede clinical atrial fibrillation (AF). Identifying biomarkers associated with micro-AF could improve early detection and risk stratification. Growth Differentiation Factor-15 (GDF-15), a stress-responsive cytokine related to inflammation and myocardial injury, has been associated with AF, but its relationship with micro-AF remains unclear. Methods: Ninety patients who underwent 24-hour Holter monitoring due to palpitations were enrolled. Forty-five patients with micro-AF and 45 controls without supraventricular tachyarrhythmia were compared. Serum GDF-15 levels and clinical characteristics were analyzed using standard statistical methods, including logistic regression analysis and Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve analyses. Results: The groups were similar in age, sex, and comorbidities. Prior stroke was significantly more frequent in the micro-AF group (28.8% vs. 6.7%, P&amp;lt;0.001). Mean serum GDF-15 levels were significantly higher in patients with micro-AF than in controls (544.2±322.5 vs. 344±138.8 pg/mL, P&amp;lt;0.001). Logistic regression revealed that GDF-15 was associated with stroke risk in univariate analysis but not independently in multivariate analysis. Conclusions: Elevated GDF-15 levels in individuals with micro-AF suggest an underlying inflammatory or structural atrial substrate, supporting its potential role as a biomarker for early arrhythmia detection and assessment of thromboembolic risk. Larger, prospective studies are warranted to clarify the prognostic significance of GDF-15 in micro-AF.

Bu eser, kaynaştırma uygulamalarının din öğretimi bağlamında nasıl yürütüldüğünü anlamaya yönelik özgün bir saha araştırmasına dayanmaktadır. Çalışmanın odağında, DKAB öğretmenlerinin kaynaştırma öğrencilerine yönelik tutumları, deneyimleri ve karşılaştıkları güçlükler karşısında geliştirdikleri stratejiler yer almaktadır. Öğretmen görüşleri doğrultusunda din öğretiminin özel gereksinimli bireylerin eğitimiyle nasıl bütünleştirilebileceği değerlendirilmekte ve kapsayıcı uygulamalara yönelik öneriler sunulmaktadır. Disiplinler arası yapısıyla eser, din eğitimi ve özel eğitim alanlarında önemli bir başvuru kaynağıdır.

Bu çalışmanın amacı, farklı alanlarda sağlık hizmeti veren veteriner hekimlerin çalışma yoğunluğunu belirlemek, çalışma temposu ile başa çıkmada gıda takviyesi kullanım sıklığı ve tercihlerini değerlendirmektir. 130 veteriner hekimle gerçekleştirilen anket çalışması sonucunda veteriner hekimlerin %45.4’ünün günde 10 saat ve üzeri çalıştığı, %75.4’ünün hafta sonları sürekli veya bazen çalıştığı, %47.7’sinin sürekli veya bazen nöbet sistemiyle veya gece mesaisi şeklinde çalıştığı ortaya konmuştur. Ayrıca, veteriner hekimlerin %56.2’sinin ay içerisinde en az bir gün 12 saat ve üzeri çalıştığı, %70.8’inin trafikte iki saatten az kaldığı tespit edilmiştir. Çalışma alanlarına göre yapılan değerlendirmede çalışma saatleri en yüksek olan ve hafta sonu çalışmanın en fazla, nöbet veya gece iş için çağırılmanın, günlük 12 saat üzerinde çalışmanın en yaygın olduğu alanın serbest veteriner hekimlik olduğu ve onu özel sektörün izlediği saptanmıştır (p&amp;lt;0.05). Veteriner hekimlerin %37.7’sinin gün içerisinde kendini yorgun ya da çok yorgun hissettiği, %65.4’ünün kendini yorgun hissettiğinde bazen gıda takviyesi kullandığı belirlenmiştir. Düzenli gıda takviyesi kullananlar %20, ihtiyaç duyduğunda kullananlar %51.6’dır. Gıda takviyelerine %49.6 doktor tavsiyesiyle başlandığı, %77.4 eczaneden temin edildiği saptanmıştır. Kendini yorgun veya çok yorgun olarak tanımlayan veteriner hekimler arasında günde 10 saat üzeri (%57.1) ve hafta sonu çalışmanın (%69.4) yüksek olduğu gözlenmiştir. Gün içerisinde hissettikleri enerji düzeyini yorgun ve çok yorgun olarak tanımlayan katılımcıların %44.9’u gıda takviyesi kullandıktan sonra kendilerini daha sağlıklı hissettiğini ifade ederken, %73,5’i yorgun hissettiğinde bazen ve her zaman gıda takviyesi kullandığı yanıtını vermiştir. Kendini yorgun ve çok yorgun olarak tanımlayan katılımcılarda %81.6 vitamin, %59.2 mineral, %30.6 yağ asidi, %14.3 protein/aminoasit ve %55.1 bağışıklık destekleyici kullanımı tercih edildiği görülmüştür. Yorgun ve çok yorgun hissedenlerin çoğunlukla serbest ve özel sektör çalışanı veteriner hekimler (%83.7) olduğu gözlenmiştir (p&amp;lt;0.05). Sonuç olarak veteriner hekimler arasında gıda takviyelerinin yorgunluk belirtisine karşı yaygın olarak kullanıldığı ve hissedilen sağlıklı olma durumu ve enerji düzeyi seviyelerine olumlu etki ettiği ortaya konmuştur.

Objective: This study aimed to evaluate the appropriateness of antibiotic therapy and discharge prescriptions in patients with lower respiratory tract infections (LRTIs) using the Medication Appropriateness Index (MAI) criteria. Methods: A retrospective cross-sectional study was conducted between January 2022 and January 2024 at a tertiary training and research hospital. A total of 111 patients diagnosed with community-acquired pneumonia, acute/chronic bronchitis, or infectious exacerbations of COPD and asthma were included. Prescriptions were evaluated independently by two physicians based on the ten MAI domains. Results: All prescriptions were fully appropriate regarding indication, effectiveness, dosage, and directions (100%). No clinically significant drug–drug or drug–disease interactions were detected. Unnecessary antibiotic duplication occurred in 4.5% of cases, and cost appropriateness was achieved in 68%. Monotherapy was predominant during hospitalization, while a trend toward narrower-spectrum and more cost-effective regimens was observed at discharge. Conclusion: According to MAI assessment, overall clinical appropriateness of antibiotic prescribing was high. Reducing unnecessary duplication and promoting cost-effective alternatives may further strengthen rational antibiotic use and antimicrobial stewardship practices.

Amaç: Bu çalışmanın amacı, minimal invaziv subspinal SARME (MISARME) ve kon-vansiyonel SARME (CSARME) yöntemlerinin nazolabial ve yüz yumuşak doku parametreleri üzerindeki etkilerini 3D stereofotogrametri yöntemi ile karşılaştırmaktır. Yöntem: Prospektif, randomize ve çift kör tasarıma sahip bu çalışmaya maksiller transvers darlık tanısı konulan 35 hasta dahil edilmiştir. Çalışma grubuna MISARME, kontrol grubuna ise CSARME uygulanmıştır. Yumuşak doku değişiklikleri preoperatif ve postopera-tif farklı zaman dilimlerinde 3D stereofotogrametri ile değerlendirilmiştir. Bulgular: MISARME tekniğinin nazolabial estetik üzerinde daha sınırlı değişikliklere yol açtığı, özellikle üst dudak uzunluğunun korunmasında daha stabil sonuçlar sağladığı belirlenmiştir. Nazolabial açı, nasal tip açısı, kolumella yüksekliği ve supratip kırılma açısı açısından gruplar arasında istatistiksel olarak anlamlı fark bulunmamıştır. Sonuç: Minimal invaziv subspinal yaklaşım; cerrahi morbiditeyi azaltan, estetik so-nuçları koruyan ve hasta konforunu artıran güvenilir bir alternatiftir. Estetik beklentisi yük-sek erişkin maksiller transvers darlık hastalarında MISARME’nin tercih edilmesi önerilmek-tedir.

This study aimed to determine the significant relationship between cytotoxic chemotherapy and opportunistic infections (OIs) in cancer patients. This cross-sectional study used census sampling to include 101 patients receiving chemotherapy at Indira Gandhi Memorial Hospital, Maldives, from 1 January 2022 to 30 November 2023. Data were analyzed using SPSS version 29, with Pearson’s chi-squared test used to assess associations between OIs and clinical variables. No significant association was found with demographics or comorbidities. However, OIs were significantly associated with neutropenia, advanced cancer stage, combined chemotherapy increased number of cycles, prolonged treatment duration, and use of invasive devices. Neutropenia occurred in 42.57% (n=43) of patients, and 15.84% (n=16) developed OIs during the nadir period. Bacterial infections were most common, with Klebsiella pneumoniae being the predominant pathogen. Theses findings highlight the importance of monitoring immunosuppression, treatment intensity, and procedural risks to reduced OIs in patients undergoing chemotherapy.

Numerous treatments for breast cancer have emerged in recent years, influenced by genetic and environmental factors that contribute to the disease's heterogeneity. Breast cancer stem cells are a primary driver of tumor aggressiveness and pose significant challenges to effective treatment. This assessment highlights that the identification of promising therapeutic approaches has led to substantial advancements in breast cancer treatment. Brain metastases, which carry a poor prognosis, are predominantly caused by breast cancer. Management of brain metastases in breast cancer patients typically involves a combination of systemic medications and local therapies, such as radiation or surgery. The introduction of novel antibody-drug conjugates has revolutionized the treatment landscape for metastatic breast cancer. Additionally, technological advancements are being leveraged to improve patient outcomes and streamline processes in the rapidly evolving healthcare sector. Given that breast cancer is the most common cancer among women worldwide, successful management necessitates innovative strategies. This review discusses both healthy and unhealthy dietary influences, as well as preventive measures, including radiation and chemotherapy.

The issue of nutritional status in toddlers is one of the crucial concerns in the health sector, particularly in efforts to prevent stunting and malnutrition. At Karang Rejo Public Health Center, the assessment of toddlers’ nutritional status is still conducted manually by relying on weight-based estimation, which makes the classification process less efficient and increases the risk of inaccuracies in determining nutritional status. This study aims to apply the K-Nearest Neighbor (K-NN) algorithm as a faster and more accurate method for classifying toddlers’ nutritional status. The research stages include data collection, data processing, and the application of the K-NN algorithm. The data used consist of 100 toddler records, including the variables of weight-for-age (BB/U), height-for-age (TB/U), and weight-for-height (BB/TB) as the basis for determining nutritional status. The results show that the application of the K-NN algorithm with an optimal k value of 3 is able to produce nutritional status classifications that are consistent with doctors’ assessments. Performance evaluation using a Confusion Matrix on the test data yields an accuracy of 100%, with precision and recall values also reaching 100% for each nutritional status category. These findings indicate that all test data are classified correctly. Therefore, the application of this method is expected to assist healthcare workers at Karang Rejo Public Health Center in diagnosing and monitoring toddlers’ nutritional status more effectively and efficiently.

<title>Abstract</title> Background Aortic injury secondary to rib fractures is an extremely rare but life-threatening complication of blunt thoracic trauma. Most of the documented cases result in prehospital mortality or death shortly after arrival because of massive hemothorax. Although the surgical stabilization of rib fractures (SSRF) has become increasingly integrated into thoracic trauma care, its role in the presence of vascular injury remains poorly documented. This case reveals the feasibility of staged management involving emergent aortic repair and subsequent rib stabilization. Case presentation A 71-year-old female patient sustained multiple left posterior rib fractures and solid-organ injuries following a traffic accident. Initial management involved exploratory laparotomy and splenectomy for hemoperitonea. Several hours later, a sudden massive hemothorax developed, and cardiac arrest occurred due to active bleeding from a descending aortic laceration caused by displaced posterior rib fragments. Emergency thoracotomy revealed a 6-mm aortic laceration, which was repaired with primary suturing and pericardial patch reinforcement. Following hemodynamic stabilization, SSRF was performed to fix the displaced sixth and seventh ribs and prevent further complications with plates and screws (MatrixRIB™ system). The patient was extubated on postoperative day 12 and discharged on postoperative day 19 in good condition without any complication. Conclusions This case illustrates a rare instance of survival following aortic injury induced by rib fractures and emphasizes the need for high clinical suspicion in similar presentations. Early vascular control combined with prompt rib fixation may reduce morbidity rates by restoring chest wall stability, improving respiratory mechanics, and preventing secondary complications. The favorable outcome supports an integrated surgical approach in selecting patients with complex thoracic trauma involving vascular structures.

Subtyping of PD based on clinical phenotype is rapidly evolving, driven by advances in understanding its pathological mechanisms and clinical heterogeneity. Identifying distinct PD phenotypes is essential to deliver personalized care and optimize clinical trial design, particularly for disease-modifying therapies. Neurotransmitter-based subtyping (cholinergic/noradrenergic/serotonergic) provides a biologically grounded framework that partially overlaps with anatomical models such as the brain-first/body-first distinction. However, validity of such models is also controversial, especially in more advanced stages of PD where many pathways merge. Integrating multimodal data, including clinical/imaging/biomarker/genetic measures, is crucial to improve stratification accuracy and account for comorbidities/copathology. Future progress relies on hypothesis-supervised data-driven approaches, longitudinal validation, and globally inclusive cohorts to achieve robust, biologically informed, and clinically meaningful PD subtyping.

Background: Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) are a new anti-cancer therapy that have improved survival rates in many aggressive cancers. However, while rare, a significant number of patients develop ICI-induced cardiotoxicity. Clinical manifestations are non-specific and underlying cellular mechanisms remain unknown, making diagnosis and treatment of these ICI-induced cardiac side effects difficult. Exercise has shown protective effects against chemotherapy-induced cardiotoxicity but has not been investigated in combination with ICIs. High-intensity exercise has shown greatest cardioprotective effects in preclinical (animal) models, but human cancer patients prefer low-intensity exercise in the clinical setting. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to further identify the cardioprotective effects of low-intensity exercise as a treatment strategy against ICI-induced cardiotoxicity. Methods: Female mice were randomly selected and separated into four groups: sedentary (SED), sedentary ICI-treated (SED + ICI), low-intensity treadmill-exercised (TM), and low-intensity treadmill-exercised ICI-treated mice (TM + ICI). Mice either underwent a 4-week low-intensity treadmill exercise protocol (TM) or remained sedentary (SED). During the 4 weeks, ICI mice received anti-PD-1 treatment (200 μg/mouse) via intraperitoneal injections twice each week. Echocardiography was performed at baseline and sacrifice to determine changes in cardiac structure and function. At sacrifice, cardiac tissue was collected, weighed, and frozen for further biochemical analysis. Underlying metabolic signaling pathways were assessed via Western Blot, and autophagic flux was analyzed via fluorescent microscopy. Results: Echocardiography at sacrifice revealed significantly decreased fractional shortening as a measure of cardiac function (−20%), 1.5-fold dilation of the left ventricle, and thinning of the posterior cardiac wall at systole and diastole in SED + ICI mice compared to SED controls (p &lt; 0.05), indicative of a phenotype of ICI-induced dilated cardiomyopathy. TM + ICI mice did not show a significant difference in these cardiac structural and functional parameters, suggesting cardioprotective effects of low-intensity exercise. In line with these findings, Western Blot and fluorescent microscopy analyses revealed upregulation of autophagic flux (p &lt; 0.05), as well as dysfunctional metabolic pathways (p &lt; 0.05) in ICI-treated mice compared to non-ICI controls. Low-intensity exercise was associated with regulation of dysfunctional metabolism and autophagy in TM + ICI compared to SED + ICI mice. Conclusions: The clinically relevant ICI treatment protocol used in this study led to significant cardiac dysfunction and remodeling, accompanied by underlying dysfunctional metabolism and autophagy. Low-intensity exercise was capable of regulating abnormal protein synthesis and degradation and protecting against ICI-induced cardiotoxicity. This study adds knowledge to the characterization of still unclear clinical manifestations of ICI-induced cardiotoxicity, underlying signaling pathways that could shed light on potential pharmacological treatment targets, as well as the protective effects of low-intensity exercise as a non-pharmacological treatment strategy.

Introduction. Spastic diplegia, a specific form of cerebral palsy, significantly hampers mobility and independence in children, disrupting their normal lifestyle and development. Primarily affecting the lower limbs, this condition not only limits a child's physical activity but can also lead to a range of psychological and social issues, including reduced self-esteem and isolation from peers. Given the importance of physical therapy in a comprehensive approach to caring for children with spastic diplegia, the medical community continuously seeks to identify the latest and most improved techniques to ensure better living conditions for these patients. Data from the WHO and the Center for Medical Statistics of Ukraine emphasize the need for the development of physical therapy in the context of comprehensive treatment and rehabilitation of this category of children, confirming the importance of further research in this direction. Aіm. To analyze and evaluate the effectiveness of physical therapy as the primary means of rehabilitation for children suffering from spastic diplegia, with the aim of identifying the most effective methods and approaches that contribute to the improvement of motor functions, reduction of muscle spasticity, and enhancement of the quality of life for these children. Materials and methods. General and specialized cognitive methods were used, including comparative and logical methods. The study involved the analysis of specialized scientific and methodological literature, information sources, and the application of the systems analysis method. Results. The analysis of modern physical therapy methods for children with spastic diplegia confirmed that personalized programs are the most effective. A comprehensive approach that combines physical exercises, motor skills development, and spasticity reduction improves mobility and life quality. The significant role of family and play-based elements contributes to the child's emotional well-being.

Background Neonates hospitalized in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) can have their hemodynamic function assessed with the help of functional neonatal echocardiography (FnECHO). Despite its clinical significance, this tool is infrequently utilized in resource-limited settings. Objective The purpose of this study was to utilize FnECHO to evaluate the outcomes and modifications in management strategies for cardiovascular anomalies in both preterm and full-term neonates. Patients and Methods The study used a retrospective observational design. The study was conducted on 261 newborns in the NICU of a government hospital. All participants underwent analysis of demographic characteristics, FnECHO indications, echocardiographic findings, and assessments of changes in their management plan. The study analyzed FnECHO indications, findings, and modified management strategies, including medication adjustments, changes in monitoring protocols, and their relation to gestational age (GA). Results Of the neonates, 73.6% were preterm, with a mean (standard deviation) GA of 33.87 (3.78) weeks. Respiratory distress (28.7%) and premature hemodynamic assessment (28.7%) were the primary indications for FnECHO. Moderate to severe pulmonary hypertension (31%) and hemodynamically significant patent ductus arteriosus (20.7%) were detected. Changes in management plans occurred in 53.3% of cases, with preterm neonates accounting for 47.9% of these changes. Conclusion Management changes occurred in more than half of the cases following the use of the FnECHO tool. The study highlights the value of the FnECHO tool in optimizing neonatal care and emphasizes the importance of implementing FnECHO into routine NICU practices; however, further studies are needed to investigate its long-term effects and cost-effectiveness in resource-limited settings.

ASI eksklusif, artinya bayi hanya diberikan ASI saja, tanpa ada tambahan makanan dan minuman lainnya (kecuali obat obatan dalam bentuk sirup), dan diberikan saat bayi berumur 0-6 bulan. Tujuan dari penelitian ini Untuk mengetahui Faktor-Faktor Berhubungan Dengan Pemberian ASI Eksklusif Pada Ibu Yang Memiliki Bayi Usia 7-12 Bulan di Poskesdes Desa Rekimai Jaya Kabupaten Muara Enim Tahun 2025. Faktor yang mempengarui pemberian ASI Ekslusif meliputi Pengetahuan, pekerjaan, dukungan suami, usia, akses informasi dan norma sosial. Penelitian ini menggunakan pendekatan crosss sectional yang dilakukan di Poskesdes Desa Rekimai Jaya Kabupaten Muara Enim pada tanggal 25 Juni – 1 Juli tahun 2025. dengan menggunakan analisis univariat dan bivariat. Hasil yang didapatkan dari 56 responden yang diteliti sebanyak 30 responden (53,6) yang memberikan ASI Ekslusif dan sebanyak 26 responden (46,4) yang tidak memberikan ASI Ekslusif. Sebagian besar 27 responden (48,2%) dengan pengetahuan kurang, 25 responden (44,6%) tidak bekerja dan 32 responden (57,1%) dukungan suami kurang. Berdasarkan uji chi-square diketahui bahwa ada hubungan pengetahuan dengan pemberian asi ekslusif di peroleh p-valurer 0,000, ada hubungan pekerjaan ibu dengan pemberian ASI Ekslusif di peroleh p-valurer 0,000, ada hubungan dukungan keluarga dengan pemberian asi ekslusif di peroleh p- valurer 0,001. Dapat disimpulkan bahwa ada hubungan pengetahuan, pekerjaan dan dukungan keluarga secara simultan dengan pemberian ASI Ekslusif di Poskesdes Desa Rekimai Jaya Kabupaten Muara Enim. Saran untukTenaga kesehatan di Puskesdes Desa Rekimai Jaya untuk meningkatkan penyuluhan dan konseling mengenai ASI eksklusif serta strategi untuk mengatasi hambatan agar cakupan ASI eksklusif meningkat

Background: Acne vulgaris (AV) is a skin disorder affecting both sexes, starting at adolescence, and might continue into late adulthood. It is represented by a flare-up of nodular and postural lesions. Acne vulgaris patients with severe presentation suffer the consequences of skin scarring and disfigurement. Both Interleukin 1 beta (IL-1β) and Interleukin 8 (IL-8) are pro-inflammatory cytokines that play a significant role in acne pathogenesis and disease progression. Objectives: To assess the serum level of interleukin 1 beta and interleukin 8 in acne patients and see how it correlates with the severity of the disease.Methods: It was a case–control study conducted from October 2024 to March 2025, with 60 acne vulgaris patients divided into two groups, mild and severe, with ages ranging from 14 to 25 years. The patients were seen in the Dermatology Center, Baghdad Teaching Hospital, The Medical City Complex, Baghdad, Iraq. Thirty healthy individuals of both sexes of similar age groups to the patients were recruited as controls in this study. A detailed history was taken, and clinical examination was performed on all the participants. For each participant, IL-1β and IL-8 were measured using the Enzyme‑Linked Immunosorbent Assay method and the results were statistically analyzed and tabulated.Results: The difference between the control and patient groups in regard to IL-1β and the difference between the patient groups themselves were not significant. Regarding IL-8, there was a significant difference between the control and patient groups and between the control and severe groups, while the difference between patient groups was highly significant.Conclusion: Blood quantification of Interleukin 8 proved useful in trying to assess the severity of acne vulgaris, while serum Interleukin 1 beta levels proved to be of no value in assessing the severity of Acne vulgaris.

Cutaneous metastasis as the initial presenting sign of an underlying gastric signet ring cell carcinoma (SRCC) is very rare and easily confused with benign dermatologic disease. We present a 46-year-old female who developed multiple firm, erythematous nodules over the breast, shoulder, and buttocks over 3 months. The skin lesions were initially treated as soft-tissue infections, but there was no response to therapy. A core biopsy of the skin ultimately disclosed metastatic adenocarcinoma with prominent intracytoplasmic mucin and signet-ring morphology; similar malignant cells were subsequently identified in pleural and ascitic fluids. Immunohistochemical (IHC) studies demonstrated a CK7-positive, CK20-negative pattern with strong mucin expression and weak CDX2 labeling, consistent with an upper gastrointestinal primary. Cross-sectional imaging identified diffuse gastric wall thickening consistent with lienitis plastica, peritoneal and pleural involvement, and distant osseous metastases. Poorly differentiated signet ring cell gastric adenocarcinoma was confirmed through endoscopic biopsies, defining stage IV disease. Fluoropyrimidine-platinum chemotherapy and then second-line irinotecan failed to halt disease progression in this patient; her cancer reflected the classic chemo resistant behavior for this histologic subtype. She survived approximately two years after diagnosis. This case thus underlines the need to include metastatic cancer in the differential diagnosis of any persisting or atypical skin nodule: an approach which calls for early biopsy and well-thought-out interpretation of immunophenotyping findings, followed by timely integration of imaging to disclose the silent gastric malignancy and guide management appropriately in a multidisciplinary manner.

Real-time SWE measurement of Young's modulus of cervical duct elasticity in pregnant women with different modes of conception is valuable for predicting spontaneous preterm birth, and a combined prediction model consisting of elastic Young's modulus values of the upper lip of the endocervical os (point A) together with the CL and endocervical os morphology is even more valuable for predicting spontaneous preterm birth in pregnant women who underwent IVF-ET.

N/a for abstract

Hematological toxicity can be clinically important during psychotropic treatment. We present the case of a 40-year-old Guinean man with schizoaffective disorder who developed neutropenia and leukopenia after starting chlorpromazine (300 mg/day), and a second neutropenic episode under carbamazepine (800 mg/day). He had never been treated with antipsychotics before. Then a first hematological abnormality appeared ten days after initiating chlorpromazine, and the second episode occurred three weeks after introducing carbamazepine. In these situations, cessation of the suspected drug led to rapid normalization of hematological values. These events were reported to the pharmacovigilance center, and these medications were formally contraindicated for our patient. Chlorpromazine and mood stabilizers like carbamazepine are known causes of leukopenia and agranulocytosis, in this case , ethnic neutropenia was initially considered but the clear temporal association between drug exposure and hematological abnormalities supported a diagnosis of drug-induced neutropenia. This case illustrates the importance of systematic blood count monitoring when initiating psychotropic drugs known to cause hematologic adverse effects.

ABSTRACT Objective The mechanical thrombectomy (MT) strategy obviously differs for acute middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) stroke caused by embolism or atherosclerosis. Our study aimed to develop and validate a simple and universally applicable score for predicting etiology [embolism or intracranial arteriosclerosis (ICAS)] before MT in patients with acute MCAO stroke. Methods Between November 2019 and September 2022, we retrospectively enrolled eligible patients in our hospital as the training cohort. Additionally, consecutive patients between July 2023 and April 2024 were recruited as the validation cohort. Multivariate logistic regression analysis was used to identify the independent factors associated with etiology in the training group. Each factor was then point assigned based on β‐coefficient, and a risk scoring system was developed. The scoring system was validated through the validation cohort. The C ‐statistic, Brier score, and Hosmer‐Lemeshow test were used to assess model discrimination and calibration. Results The training group and validation group finally included 277 patients (154 embolism‐MCAO and 123 ICAS‐MCAO) and 101 patients (59 embolism‐MCAO and 42 ICAS‐MCAO), respectively. A scoring system (AHOC score) covering four variables (atrial fibrillation, hyperdense middle cerebral artery sign, stenosis/occlusion in other arteries, and collateral status) was derived to help identify embolism‐MCAO or ICAS‐MCAO. The AHOC score showed good discrimination and calibration in the training cohort ( C ‐statistic, 0.932 [0.902–0.963]; Brier score, 0.092 [0.070–0.115]; p value of the Hosmer‐Lemeshow test, 0.604) and in the validation cohort ( C ‐statistic, 0.933 [0.888–0.978]; Brier score, 0.102 [0.067–0.140]; p value of the Hosmer‐Lemeshow test, 0.846). According to the AHOC score, patients with a score of 4–8 were identified as high‐risk for the embolism‐MCAO category. Conversely, a patient with a score of 0–3 was considered high‐risk for the ICAS‐MCAO category. Conclusions Our scoring system (AHOC score), consisting of atrial fibrillation, hyperdense middle cerebral artery sign, stenosis/occlusion in other arteries and collateral status, is a valid and applicable model for predicting the etiology in patients with acute MCAO before MT.

Diabetic foot ulcers are a major cause of approximately 85% of amputations in non-trauma patients. One of the contributing factors is the presence of extensive gangrenous infections. Effective management of diabetic foot infections to prevent amputation requires knowledge of various factors such as ulcer location, depth, neuropathy, vasculopathy, infection, and the presence of infection, which can be identified through inflammatory markers. This retrospective cohort study aimed to evaluate the correlation between leukocyte count, neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (NLR), C-reactive protein (CRP), and serum lactate levels with the incidence of amputation in DFU patients. All DFU patients admitted to Dr. Hasan Sadikin General Hospital, Bandung, from January 1 to December 31, 2023, who met the inclusion criteria were included using purposive sampling. A total of 47 patients with diabetic foot ulcers were included in this study. The mean, median, and range of leukocytes were 18,532, 16,015, and 55,184, respectively, with higher values observed in amputation cases. NLR values were also higher in amputation cases, with a mean of 9.54, median of 6.00, and range of 47.32. Similarly, CRP levels were elevated in amputation cases, with a mean of 9.56, median of 6.75, and range of 26.16. There is a significant correlation between leukocytes, NLR, CRP, and serum lactate with the incidence of amputation in diabetic foot ulcer patients.

Mục tiêu: Đánh giá kết quả điều trị gãy đầu dưới xương đùi bằng phẫu thuật kết xương nẹp khóa, tại Bệnh viện Quân y 17. Đối tượng và phương pháp: Mô tả cắt ngang, hồi cứu và tiến cứu theo dõi dọc, không nhóm chứng trên 49 bệnh nhân gãy đầu dưới xương đùi, được phẫu thuật kết xương nẹp khóa, tại Bệnh viện Quân y 17, từ tháng 01/2022 đến tháng 3/2024. Kết quả: Tầm vận động khớp gối trung bình sau phẫu thuật 3 tháng đạt 91,71o ± 14,39o, sau phẫu thuật 6 tháng đạt 112,55o ± 16,22o. Tỉ lệ liền xương ở thời điểm sau phẫu thuật 3 tháng và 6 tháng lần lượt là 53,8% và 94,9%. Điểm trung bình Neer ở thời điểm sau phẫu thuật 6 tháng là 84,64 ± 9,99 điểm. 86,8% bệnh nhân có kết quả rất tốt và tốt, 10,6% bệnh nhân đạt kết quả khá, chỉ có 1 bệnh nhân đạt kết quả xấu (2,6%). Kết luận: Điều trị gãy đầu dưới xương đùi bằng phẫu thuật kết xương nẹp khóa cho kết quả tốt. Nẹp vít khóa cố định ổ gãy vững chắc giúp bệnh nhân sớm phục hồi chức năng khớp gối.

Background/Objectives: Achieving complete, yet safe tumor resections are particularly challenging in pediatric oncology due to infiltrative tumor growth patterns, small patient size, and the close proximity to critical structures. Fluorescence-guided surgery (FGS) enhances visualization of anatomy, tissue perfusion, and tumor tissue in real time, potentially improving surgical precision. While widely explored in adults, its application in pediatric oncology remains limited. This review summarizes current evidence on FGS in pediatric oncology, with emphasis on the unique challenges inherent to this field. Finally, strategies to accelerate clinical translation and assess the potential clinical value are proposed. Methods: A narrative review of the literature was conducted using PubMed and Embase to identify English-language publications on FGS in pediatric oncology up to September 2025. Search terms included Fluorescence, Pediatrics, Neoplasms, and Surgery. Results: Studies commonly reported that indocyanine green (ICG) aids in lymph node mapping, hepatoblastoma resection, and visualization of vascular structures and tissue perfusion. However, its non-specific nature and lack of histopathological validation limits diagnostic precision in tumor imaging. Tissue-specific agents are being investigated in first-in-humans trials to improve sensitivity and specificity, and to identify ureters and nerves. Conclusions: In this review, the challenging roadmap for advancing FGS in pediatric oncology is presented. Closing current gaps will require coordinated efforts in target discovery, agent design, and clinical validation. If successful, FGS can evolve from a promising tool into an indispensable clinical technique that enhances surgical precision, reduces recurrence, and ultimately improves long-term outcomes for children with cancer.

<title>Abstract</title> Background: Gastroparesis is a debilitating disorder characterized by delayed gastric emptying without mechanical obstruction, carrying significant mortality risks. Accurate prediction of mortality remains challenging due to the condition's heterogeneous nature. This study aimed to develop and validate machine learning models for predicting both short-term and long-term mortality in patients with gastroparesis. Methods: This retrospective cohort study utilized data from the Medical Information Mart for Intensive Care IV (MIMIC-IV) database. Adult patients diagnosed with gastroparesis between 2003 and 2019 were included. Comprehensive clinical data encompassing demographics, laboratory parameters, comorbidities, and severity scores were extracted. Seven machine learning algorithms were employed to predict 30-day and 365-day mortality: logistic regression, support vector machine, random forest, k-nearest neighbors, decision tree, artificial neural network, and gradient boosting machine. Model performance was evaluated using area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC-ROC), accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score. Results: Among 6,125 eligible patients with gastroparesis, the random forest model demonstrated superior performance for both 30-day (AUC: 0.39) and 365-day mortality prediction (AUC: 0.905). Key predictors included age, red cell distribution width (RDW), Charlson comorbidity index, white blood cell count, and renal function markers. Significant mortality associations were identified for ICU admission, sepsis, acute kidney injury, and liver diseases. Conclusions: Machine learning algorithms, particularly random forest, effectively predict mortality risk in gastroparesis patients using routinely available clinical data. These models provide valuable tools for risk stratification and informed clinical decision-making, potentially improving patient outcomes through early identification of high-risk individuals.

La Spirale Dynamique, issue des travaux de Clare W. Graves, constitue un modèle largement utilisé pour comprendre l’évolution des systèmes de valeurs individuels et collectifs. Son usage courant tend cependant à privilégier une lecture linéaire et hiérarchique, qui ne permet pas toujours de distinguer clairement les notions de développement, d’intégration et de dysfonctionnement. Le présent article propose une extension de la Spirale Dynamique en introduisant une lecture radiale, complémentaire à la progression des couleurs. Cette dimension vise à décrire la manière dont chaque système de valeurs est vécu et incarné, en particulier la façon dont une identité se construit, agit et se maintient comme entité séparée dans le monde. Cette lecture permet de distinguer, au sein d’une même couleur, des formes de fonctionnement équilibrées, des formes de rigidification ou de dissociation — où l’identité se fige ou se caricature — et des configurations plus intégrées, dans lesquelles la logique de la couleur demeure active tout en devenant moins défensive et plus ouverte. L’article introduit également les notions de couleurs antagonistes et résonantes, ainsi qu’une méthode de diagnostic et d’équilibrage intra-spirale. Celle-ci vise à identifier les déséquilibres et les angles morts liés à l’exclusion ou à la caricature de certaines couleurs, afin de favoriser l’émergence d’une vision plus intégrative, associée au fonctionnement Jaune. Ce cadre s’inscrit explicitement dans une perspective de formation et d’accompagnement, et non de soin ou de thérapie.

This study evaluated the association of lymphocyte-based composite inflammatory indices with lower extremity arteriosclerosis obliterans (LEASO). PubMed, Embase, Cochrane Library, and Web of Science were searched up to March 12, 2024. The endpoints included mortality, amputation, restenosis, major adverse limb events, and amputation-free survival (AFS). In total, 33 studies were included (n = 12 386). For categorical variables, the results showed that high neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (NLR) was closely associated with mortality, restenosis, amputation, and AFS (OR: 1.31; 95% CI: 1.17-1.47, 1.46; 95% CI: 1.15-1.84, 1.83; 95% CI: 1.48-2.27 and 2.29; 95% CI: 1.75-3.00, respectively; all P &lt; .00001). High platelet-to-lymphocyte ratio (PLR) was not significantly associated with mortality, restenosis, and amputation. High systemic immune-inflammation index (SII) was not significantly correlated with restenosis. For continuous variables, NLR and PLR were correlated with amputation, while the relationship between lymphocyte to monocyte ratio (LMR) and amputation was relatively weak. Subgroup analysis revealed that preoperative NLR testing was more valuable in predicting mortality and restenosis than postoperative testing. High NLR is significantly associated with amputation, restenosis, and AFS of LEASO patients. Furthermore, preoperative NLR is more accurate in predicting LEASO prognosis. PLR, LMR, and SII are not insignificant correlated with LEASO prognosis.

Ectodermal Dysplasia (ED) is a heterogeneous group of genetically determined disorders affecting two or more ectodermal derivatives, including skin, teeth, nails, hair, and sweat glands. Other structures, including the lips, ears, and eyes-also of ectodermal origin-may be involved. This report presents a 6-year-old Bahraini boy with ED who presented to the Paediatric Dental Clinic at the Dental and Maxillofacial Centre (DMFC), Royal Medical Services (RMS), with concerns regarding his appearance due to numerous missing teeth. Initial management focused on preventive care to preserve the existing dentition, followed by restorative procedures and comprehensive prosthetic rehabilitation. A multidisciplinary team approach was essential to establishing a practical treatment pathway.

DMVs alterations increase with AD severity, correlate with Aβ deposition, and predict cognitive decline, suggesting DMVs score as a promising imaging biomarker for early identification of individuals at risk of AD progression.

This study revealed an unrecognized harmful effect of MMA on myocardial vulnerability distinct from its isomer succinate. Targeting MMA metabolism represents a promising strategy to optimize risk stratification and mitigate myocardial injury in patients with AMI.

Introduction. Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) is the most common cardiac anomaly in preterm newborns and may aggravate respiratory disease. Invasive closure options after failure of medical treatment include surgical ligation (SL) and transcatheter closure (TCC). Reports on side effects of intravenous contrast media are scarce. Methods. In this retrospective single-center study, we compared 35 preterm infants below 1500 g birth weight undergoing SL with 35 matched infants undergoing TCC. Outcomes were procedural success, complications and postprocedural ventilation. Results. Closure success was high in both groups (97% SL vs. 86% TCC, p = 0.106). One SL patient underwent re-operation after accidental clipping of the left pulmonary artery, and eight patients (24%) had endoscopy-diagnosed vocal cord palsy after SL. Six TCC patients had complications that required further action, including device embolization, device failure and one case of late device migration that resulted in aortic arch obstruction requiring intervention, and 4 TCC patients developed necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC)-like disease within 24 h, requiring surgery in one patient. SL was associated with longer duration of mechanical ventilation (24 h vs. 144 h, p &lt; 0.001), as opposed to TCC, and higher rates of bronchopulmonary dysplasia (86% vs. 53%, p = 0.004). Discussion. Both techniques achieve high success but differ in complication profiles. TCC may reduce respiratory morbidity. NEC-like disease (probably linked to intravenous administration of contrast agents) warrants further investigation.

Background: Nowadays, majority of the students all over the world are digital natives. Due to the advancement in internet and online technology, a various web-based games have been developed. One of the popular web-based learning tools is Kahoot! The aim of this paper was to explore the experience of using Kahoot! app as a tool for conducting quiz for undergraduate medical students. Methods: The topic of contraceptive ppt was distributed to the third year MBBS medical students 2 days prior to the revision class. A 70-item e-quiz on this topic using Kahoot! app was conducted on a sample of 150 third year MBBS medical students in 2023. At the end of e-quiz, we got feedback through Google forms-created questionnaire. Results: Out of 150 students, 66.6% (n=100) reviewed the pre-class PowerPoint, and 99.3% (n=149) provided positive feedback highlighting themes like organization, interest, fun, interaction, motivation, and knowledge reinforcement. Moreover, 98.6% (n=148) supported other faculty adopting this approach by sharing materials beforehand and using Kahoot! quizzes for a more student-driven and interactive learning experience. Conclusions: As a part of teaching, Kahoot! app has made learning easier, more enjoyable, encourage the students to study and strengthens the student-centred learning. It is suggested that such study methods should be utilized more in teaching and can be incorporated in academic curriculum as well.

Introduction. Every year, more than 1 million limb amputations are recorded worldwide, with the main causes being vascular diseases and injuries. Since the beginning of the large-scale war the number of amputees in Ukraine has rapidly increased. They require long-term rehabilitation and monitoring of vital functions. Aim. To investigate the peculiarities of electrocardiogram (ECG) recording and analysis in military personnel with limb amputations during rehabilitation. Materials and methods. The ECGs of 48 military personnel with various levels of limb amputations in inpatient rehabilitation were analyzed; 5 cases are presented. Results. The ECGs of five military personnel with different levels of limb amputations were analyzed. When assessing the voltage of the ECG complexes and analyzing their waves, intervals and segments, changes in standard and augmented leads are noted. Differences in cardiac activity indicators were found with incorrect electrode placement, which can lead to erroneous ECG analysis due to improper recording technique during amputations. When assessing the shape, duration and amplitude of the ECG elements, an increase in the amplitude of the P wave and a decrease in the duration of the QRS complex were found, which can be regarded as gradual benign physiological changes at the initial stage after amputation. Myocardial repolarization parameters were analyzed, including the duration of the QT, QTc, Tr-e intervals, the Tr-e/QT, and Tr-e/QTc ratios, which should be considered as markers for predicting ventricular arrhythmias and cardiovascular mortality. Conclusions. During rehabilitation and active use of the prosthesis, physical exertion increases, which requires monitoring of vital functions. The prosthetics process requires rehabilitation at all stages (pre-prosthetic, interprosthetic, and prosthetic) both in inpatient and outpatient settings. Monitoring tolerance to physical exertion, which increases during rehabilitation, and the functions of vital organs is a necessary diagnostic procedure. ECG is a mandatory method of instrumental diagnostics at the rehabilitation stage, which requires its correct performance and analysis in patients with limb amputations depending on the level of amputation.

Background/Objectives: The hypothalamic-pituitary-testis axis is known to be dysregulated in patients with hematological malignancies. However, data on the association between the type of hematological malignancies and semen quality are discordant. In the era of personalized medicine, identifying disease-specific patterns of reproductive impairment is crucial to optimize fertility preservation strategies. While patients with leukemia often show a clear deterioration in semen quality, studies on Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphomas have shown that spermatogenesis is not always compromised. Indeed, some patients may present normospermia before treatment. This study aimed to assess semen parameters in males affected by hematological malignancies compared with a non-cancer population and to explore implications for individualized fertility preservation counseling. Methods: We performed a retrospective monocentric study including all patients affected by hematological malignancies who underwent fertility preservation at the Maternal and Child Department, Gynecology and Obstetrics, Oncofertility Unit, Federico II of Naples, from January 2017 through December 2024. In total, 247 patients with hematological malignancies and 63 non-cancer males undergoing in vitro fertilization for female tubal factor, selected as a control group, were included in the analysis. Sperm parameters (semen volume, sperm concentration, motility, and morphology) were first compared between the hematological malignancy group and the control group, and then among hematological malignancies classified as Hodgkin lymphoma (HL), non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), and leukemia (L). Results: Overall, according to World Health Organization (WHO, 2021) criteria, semen parameters of patients with hematological malignancies were at the 25th percentile, except for motility, which was below the 5th percentile. Significant differences were observed in sperm concentration/mL, total sperm number, and percentage of total sperm motility between the hematological malignancy group and the control group (p = 0.0004; p = 0.0003; p &lt; 0.0001). Based on disease classification, 158 patients had Hodgkin lymphoma, 54 had non-Hodgkin lymphoma, and 35 had leukemia. Significant differences in concentration/mL and total sperm number were found between the Hodgkin lymphoma group and the control group (p = 0.003; p = 0.001). The percentage of total sperm motility was significantly decreased in all subtypes of hematological malignancies compared with controls, especially in the leukemia group (HL p = 0.001; NHL p = 0.004; L p &lt; 0.001). Conclusions: These findings highlight significant impairment of semen quality, particularly motility, reinforcing the role of personalized medicine in tailoring fertility preservation strategies according to malignancy subtype and baseline reproductive risk.

The World Health Organization reported that in 2022, the prevalence of anemia in pregnant women worldwide was 41.8%. Based on data from the Basic Health Research (Riskesdas) in 2018, the percentage of pregnant women suffering from anemia in Indonesia was 48.9%, or approximately 5 from 10 pregnant women experienced it, 84.6% of pregnant women aged 15 to 24 years who experienced anemia. Iron deficiency anemia in pregnant women can cause 12–28 percent of fetal deaths, 30% of perinatal deaths, and 7% of neonatal deaths. Purpose of the study To determine the relationship between age, parity and compliance with Fe tablet consumption simultaneously to the incidence of anemia in the working area of ​​the Pembina Public Health Center of Palembang city in 2024. This type of research was quantitative with a cross-sectional approach. The population in this study were 120 respondents, sampling used the Accidental Sampling technique with a total of 50 respondents. The results of the study showed there was significant relationship between age and the incidence of anemia in pregnant women with a p value of 0.002 and an OR value of 9.667, there was a significant relationship between parity and the incidence of anemia in pregnant women with a p value of 0.000 and an OR value of 48.0, and there was a significant relationship between compliance with Fe tablet consumption and the incidence of anemia in pregnant women with a p value of 0.002 and an OR value of 7.778. Suggestions from the results of the study are expected to be used as information for pregnant women because it is an important stage to creat a quality family.

Aim The aim of this study was to determine the career plans, specialty preferences, and perceptions of Pediatric Dentistry (Pedodontics) among students at Biruni University Faculty of Dentistry, and to reveal the relationship of these factors with students' grade level and demographic characteristics. Material and method This descriptive and cross-sectional survey study included 268 students. Data were collected online via Google Forms between October 13 and October 17, 2025. Statistical analyses included Pearson's Chi-Square and Fisher's Exact tests. Results Statistically significant associations were found between specialty preference and gender (p = 0.015), knowledge of postgraduate education upon university entry (p=0.020), career motivations (p = 0.037), perception of the best specialty for personal quality of life (p&lt; 0.001), perception of the most sufficient department for patient care (p=0.003), and the likelihood of choosing Pedodontics as a career (p

Abstract: Dialysis access steal syndrome (DASS) is a rare but serious complication of arteriovenous fistula (AVF) used for hemodialysis (HD). While initial interventions such as venoplasty and banding are effective in many cases, recurrent steal syndrome can occur, which may necessitate a surgical intervention such as ligation. We reported a 63-year-old male presented with continuous pain in the left forearm at the AV shunt site for two days. The patient was referred to Kandou Hospital for further management due to suspected stenosis and risk of total occlusion. Vascular ultrasound and venography confirmed the diagnosis, followed by venoplasty, banding repair and central dialysis line insertion. Post-procedure angiography demonstrated restored, though weak, distal blood flow, but after three weeks, the patient returned with an edematous left distal limb and oxygen level of 93-96%. The gold standard for DASS, ligation, was then performed. Although this patient experienced edema after the first procedure, the outcome after the second intervention was very good, and the patient did not report any recurrence. In conclusion, recurrent DASS, especially in a non-mature AVF, presents unique challenges in management. This case highlights the importance of continuous post-intervention monitoring, patient education on proper AVF care, and the need for escalation to more definitive treatments like radial artery ligation when initial interventions, such as venoplasty failed. After the second intervention, the outcome was very good, and the patient did not report any recurrence. Early recognition of complications, including patient-induced factors like AVF manipulation, is crucial to prevent further morbidity and ensure the preservation of vascular access. Keywords: steal syndrome; chronic kidney disease; hemodialysis; arteriovenous fistula; venoplasty; radial artery ligation

The World Health Organization (WHO) stated that the maternal mortality rate is very high. In 2020, the maternal mortality rate was around 287,000. Preeclampsia is the main cause of high maternal mortality and morbidity worldwide. Preeclampsia is a pregnancy complication characterized by increased blood pressure and there is proteinuria. The purpose of this study was to determine the relationship between maternal age, parity, and history of hypertension simultaneously with the incidence of preeclampsia in pregnant women in the third trimester at the Muhammadiyah Hospital of Palembang in 2023. The research design used was quantitative analytic with a cross-sectional approach conducted at the Muhammadiyah Hospital of Palembang on July 2024. The population was all pregnant women listed in the medical records of the Muhammadiyah Hospital of Palembang in 2023, totaling 2,400 people, with a sample size of 196 respondents. The results of the univariate analysis from the 96 respondents showed that 18 respondents (18.8%) experienced preeclampsia and 83 respondents (81.6%) did not experience preeclampsia. The results of the study showed that there was a significant relationship between maternal age (p-value = 0.001), parity (p-value = 0.003), and history of hypertension (p-value = 0.002) with the incidence of preeclampsia at the Muhammadiyah Hospital of Palembang in 2023. It is hoped that it can increase knowledge about the problem of preeclampsia in pregnant women, so it can be a source of health science information so that it can prevent preeclampsia in pregnant women, especially mothers who have a high-risk age, high-risk parity and have a history of hypertension.

Preeclampsia is a condition with increased blood pressure in pregnant women that occurs after 20 weeks of gestation. Maternal behaviour in pregnancy care is important to study to prevent the risk of preeclampsia, such as knowledge, attitudes and actions. This study aims to identify the relationship between the behaviour of pregnant women in knowing hypertension with the incidence of eclampsia in pregnant women in the working area of Puskesmas Kampung Baru Medan. A quantitative, descriptive-correlational design was employed using a cross-sectional approach. Data were analyzed using frequency distribution and percentage tables. The data in this study are presented in the form of frequency distribution tables and percentages. The findings revealed that the majority of respondents demonstrated adequate knowledge (55%), positive attitudes (62.5%), and appropriate preventive actions (82%). A moderately strong correlation was found between maternal knowledge and the incidence of preeclampsia (p = 0.00; r = 0.398). However, no significant associations were observed between attitudes (p = 0.204) or preventive actions (p = 0.117) and preeclampsia occurrence These results underscore the need to enhance maternal knowledge regarding pregnancy-related hypertension to effectively prevent preeclampsia. Keyword: Preeclampsia, Behaviour, Care, Pregnancy

Background: Thyroid dysfunction and type I diabetes mellitus (TIDM) often coexist. Many studies reported a higher prevalence of thyroid diseases among patients with diabetes. However, there is no local relevant study on this subject.Objective: To determine the prevalence of thyroid diseases among children with TIDM at Al-Ramadi Teaching Hospital for Maternity and Children.Materials and Methods: A cross-sectional study was conducted at Al-Ramadi Teaching Hospital for Maternity and Children from October 1, 2022, to May 1, 2023. Children aged 2-16 years of both sexes with TIDM who attended the hospital for any complaints were enrolled. All patients were screened for thyroid dysfunction.Results: Of 190 children with TIDM, 25 (13.2%) had thyroid disorders. Children with thyroid dysfunction had significantly higher rates of parental consanguinity, diabetic ketoacidosis, hospital admissions, and chest infections (P-value &lt; 0.05). Children with thyroid disorders had a significantly higher rate of positive anti-thyroid peroxidase and antithyroglobulin antibodies (P-value &lt; 0.05). Glycated hemoglobin levels were significantly higher in children with thyroid dysfunction than in those with normal thyroid function. Glycated hemoglobin levels were significantly correlated with &nbsp;thyroid-stimulating hormone (P-value &lt; 0.05).Conclusion: Thyroid dysfunction is a common comorbidity in children with TIDM. Affected patients exhibit a higher rate of diabetic ketoacidosis, hospital admission, and chest infection.

There was no funding source for this study.

Nurses play a vital role and bear primary responsibility in discharge planning due to their constant interaction with patients and families. Research on discharge planning in Indonesia, particularly for post-neurosurgery patients, is still limited and rarely explored in depth, especially using a qualitative approach. Through a qualitative approach, this study was able to reveal the perceptions, challenges, and strategies of nurses that are often not seen in quantitative data. This study aims to analyse the role of nurses in discharge planning for families of patients who have undergone neurosurgery. This study employed a descriptive qualitative approach using phenomenological methods. The number of participants or informants based on saturation data or redundancy concepts can generally be achieved using purposive techniques. In-depth interviews were used in data collection. The data analysis process in this study used Colaizzi's approach. This study produced nine themes based on the Modified Concept of Meleis' Transitional Nursing Theory and Roy's Adaptive Nursing Model Theory. including medical education, clarity of information, involving the family, addressing concerns, support for access to follow-up services, follow-up support, patient/family readiness, post-discharge challenges, recommendations for services. The impact of discharge planning carried out by nurses prior to discharge home results in patients and their families being prepared to carry out nursing actions at home. Nurses should always be mindful of their role in the discharge planning process because quality discharge planning is not merely an “administrative procedure before discharge,” but rather a strategic investment. Keyword: Patient Discharge Planning, Neurosurgery Procedure, Nursing Role

In our study, we aimed to investigate the relationship between miRNA-21, miRNA-155, miRNA-34a, IL-6, TGF-β, and TNF-α expression levels and serum trace element levels in the development and progression of bladder cancer. RT-PCR was used to establish miRNA-21, miRNA-155, and miRNA-34a expression levels while serum IL-6, TGF-β, and TNF-α levels were determined using the ELISA and measured with an atomic absorption spectrophotometer. In the patient group, miRNA-21 and miRNA-155 expression levels were significantly higher compared with the healthy control group (p &lt; 0.001). Furthermore, in the patient group, miRNA-34a expression was significantly lower compared with the control group (p &lt; 0.001). IL-6, TNF-α, TGF-β, copper levels, and the copper to zinc ratio were significantly higher in the patient group (p &lt; 0.001). Serum iron and zinc levels in the patient group were significantly lower compared with the control group (p &lt; 0.001). There was a significant positive correlation between miRNA-155 and IL-6 and TNF-α (r = 0.279, p = 0.015*; r = 0.325**, p = 0.004). A significant positive correlation was detected between miRNA-34a and IL-6 and TGF-β (r = 0.294*, p = 0.010; r = 0.447**, p &lt; 0.001). By evaluating these important biomarkers together, it might be possible to implement clinical applications for bladder cancer treatment and develop individual therapeutic strategies.

Background: Anemia especially more common in the developing countries for having numerous socio-cultural problems, lack of knowledge, poor attitude and practice to prevent from the beginning. National Family Health Survey, 2019-21 reported that 59.1% of adolescent girls (15-19 years old) are anemic and this count is higher in rural areas (~58.5%) compared to urban areas (~53.8%). To check the early onset of anemia in women, it needs to be addressed properly during adolescent being regarded as the transitional stage of transformation. Methods: This study was conducted with 170 adolescent girls among the age group of 14 to 19 comprising of five classes from IX to under graduate 1st year. The inferential statistics, χ2 at α=0.05 and p&lt;0.05 was tested with demographic variables for knowledge assessment. Attitude was rated with Bloom’s cut off scale along with practice assessment. A spearman correlation was given for overall assessment of the knowledge, attitude and practice. Results: The inferential statistics, χ2 at α=0.05 and p&lt;0.05 shows the significant association of knowledge with the demographic variables like age, class and family size. Spearman correlation (ρ) justifies the moderate correlation between knowledge, attitude and practice score of the sample. Surface plot justifies the improvement of attitude and practice due to knowledge at par class and age. Conclusions: Mean knowledge score at poor level might be a factor for developing average attitude which in turn directly influenced the practice not to a good level for adolescent girls needs to be addressed further through developing the self-structured teaching programme and information booklet.

GMV-sPCNL demonstrates high success rates and an acceptable complication profile. Stone burden parameters such as stone number, stone size, and stone volume are important determinants of surgical success.

Cardiovascular ability is one of the components of physical fitness that plays a very important role in transporting oxygen to various body tissues through the heart and blood vessels; it is influenced by gender and age. Some factors that can affect cardiovascular ability are gender and age. The research aims to describe cardiovascular ability based on gender and age among employees of Swadaya Gunung Jati University. This study used an analytical descriptive research method with primary data in the form of cardiovascular ability measurements obtained via the Harvard Step Test from 77 employees of Swadaya Gunung Jati University. The statistical analysis employed was the univariate test. Among men, cardiovascular ability was very good for the largest group (19 people); among women, it was very poor for the largest group (12 people). For those aged &gt;40 years, cardiovascular ability was very poor for the largest group (15 people); for those ?40 years, it was very good for the largest group (16 people). Among men &gt;40 years old, cardiovascular ability was very poor for the largest group (9 people), while for men ?40 years old, it was very good for the largest group (12 people). Among women &gt;40 years old, the largest group had very poor cardiovascular ability (15 people), while for women ?40 years old, it was very good for the largest group (16 people). The research found that Gender and age affect the cardiovascular ability of Swadaya Gunung Jati University employees.

Đặt vấn đề: Gãy đầu trên xương cánh tay là vị trí hay gặp nhất trong gãy xương cánh tay, phẫu thuật kết hợp xương bằng nẹp khóa được sử dụng tại nhiều bệnh viện và đã cho kết quả tốt. Mục tiêu: Đánh giá kết quả phẫu thuật kết hợp xương bằng nẹp khóa điều trị gãy kín đầu trên xương cánh tay tại Bệnh viện Trung ương Thái Nguyên. Đối tượng và phương pháp: Nghiên cứu mô tả 57 bệnh nhân dược phẫu thuật kết hợp xương bằng nẹp khóa điều trị gãy kín đầu trên xương cánh tay tại Bệnh viện Trung ương Thái Nguyên từ tháng 01/2020 đến tháng 03/2025. Kết quả: Bệnh nhân nam chiếm 31,6%, có 39 bệnh nhân chiếm tỷ lệ 68,4% bệnh nhân nữ. Tuổi trung bình của bệnh nhân 55,2 ± 17,0 trong đó nhóm tuổi từ 60 trở lên chiếm tỷ lệ 45,6%. Nghề nghiệp là nông dân chiếm 26,3%. Tai nạn giao thông và tai nạn sinh hoạt chiếm tỷ lệ lần lượt 50,9% và 45,6%. Tỷ lệ bệnh nhân không được xử trí trước phẫu thuật chiếm 56,1%, có ,3% bệnh nhân bó thuốc nam. Độ nghiêng của chỏm xo với trục xương cánh tay từ 300 đến 600 chiếm tỷ lệ 71,9%, dưới 300 hoặc trên 600 chiếm tỷ lệ 28,1%. Bệnh nhân có phân loại III theo Neer trên X-quang trước mổ chiếm 35,1%. Bệnh nhân được đặt nẹp đúng chiếm tỷ lệ 87,7%. Tỷ lệ bắt vít đúng và đủ chiếm 84,2%, chỉ có 15,8% trường hợp vít xuyên qua chỏm. Điểm đánh giá mức độ đau trung bình 29,8 ± 2,5, điểm trung bình phục hồi chức năng chi gãy 26,3 ± 2,2. Điểm trung bình phục hồi biên độ vận động khớp vai và phục hồi giải phẫu khớp vai 22,3 ± 2,5 và 8,6 ± 0,7. Kết quả tốt chiếm 52,6%, kết quả khá có 45,6%, kết quả trung bình 1,8% và không có bệnh nhân có kết quả điều trị kém. Kết luận: phẫu thuật gãy đầu trên xương cánh tay bằng nẹp khóa là phương pháp thông dụng và đem lại hiệu quả cao.

Medical education extends beyond textbooks, with experiential learning crucial to cultivate empathy, professionalism and social accountability. Our curriculum at the Patan Academy of Health Sciences includes simulations of being differently abled, medical humanities, communication skill development and community and rural clinical postings. Compassionate communication developed along with critical thinking and growth as a professional when interacting with elderly residents, chronic diseases patients and Female Community Health Volunteers. These reflections highlight the transformational impact of experiential learning in shaping full and competent physicians.

NA

Background: Coronary artery disease (CAD) remains a leading cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide, with a rising burden in low-resource regions, such as Bundelkhand. Acute coronary syndrome (ACS), a common presentation of CAD, often manifests with varied demographic and angiographic profiles influenced by regional risk factor patterns. Aims and Objectives: To assess the demographic characteristics, cardiovascular risk factors, and angiographic patterns of CAD in patients presenting with ACS in the Bundelkhand region. Materials and Methods: This cross-sectional observational study included 150 consecutive ACS patients (ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction [STEMI], Non-STEMI, or unstable angina) admitted to Maharani Laxmi Bai Medical College, Jhansi, from April 2024 to March 2025. Data on demographics, risk factors, and clinical presentation were collected using a structured pro forma. All patients underwent electrocardiogram, cardiac biomarkers, echocardiography, and coronary angiography. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS v21, with P&lt;0.05 considered significant. Results: Males predominated (80.67%), especially in the 30–50 years group (P=0.04). STEMI was the most common presentation (68.67%), with anterior wall myocardial infarction leading (44.67%). Hypertension (44%), dyslipidemia (41.33%), and diabetes mellitus (30%) were the most frequent risk factors. Angiography revealed single vessel disease (SVD) in 56%, double vessel disease (30%), and triple vessel disease (14%). The left anterior descending (LAD) artery was most involved (28% in SVD). Diabetes and hypertension showed a significant association with multivessel disease (P=0.003 each). Conclusions: ACS in Bundelkhand predominantly affects middle-aged males, with LAD-predominant SVD as the commonest angiographic finding. Diabetes and hypertension significantly influence disease severity, underscoring the need for early detection and aggressive risk factor control.

Doğal krizler, dünya genelinde büyük kayıplara yol açmakta ve toplumsal yapıları derinden sarsmaktadır. Bu tür afetlerin etkileri, yalnızca fiziki altyapıyı değil, aynı zamanda psikolojik, sosyoekonomik ve sağlık alanlarını da derinden etkilemektedir. Kadın sağlığı ve üreme sağlığı, afetler sırasında en çok zarar gören alanlar arasında yer almaktadır. Bu bölümde, doğal krizlerin türleri ve bu krizlerin kadınlar üzerindeki etkileri ele alınmış, afetlerde ebelerin oynadığı kritik rol vurgulanmıştır. Ebelik hizmetleri, doğum, yenidoğan bakımı, emzirme desteği, psikososyal destek ve kadın sağlığının korunması gibi kritik alanlarda, özellikle afet anlarında büyük önem taşımaktadır. Ebeler, afetler sırasında kadınların doğum süreçlerinde sağlık hizmeti sunmanın yanı sıra, yenidoğan bakımı ve emzirme danışmanlığı gibi önemli destekler sağlamaktadır. Ayrıca, doğum öncesi, doğum sırası ve doğum sonrası dönemdeki sağlık takibi, afetlerin etkisiyle zorlaşan sağlık hizmetlerine erişim konusunda ebelerin sağladığı destek büyük bir fark yaratmaktadır. Afet bölgelerinde ebeler, sadece tıbbi hizmet sağlamakla kalmaz, aynı zamanda psikososyal destek vererek toplumun yeniden iyileşmesinde önemli bir rol oynar. Afet planlamalarında ebelik mesleğinin yer alması, yalnızca acil sağlık hizmetlerinin sunulması için değil, aynı zamanda afet sonrasındaki toplumsal yeniden yapılanma sürecinde de kritik bir adımdır. Bu bölümde; doğal krizlerin tanımı, ebelerin bu krizlerde önemi ve rolleri ve karşılaşılan zorluklardan bahsedilmiştir. Son olarak, ebelik eğitimlerinin güçlendirilmesi, afetlerde ebelik hizmetlerinin sürekliliği için politikaların ve mevzuatların düzenlenmesi ve afet yönetimi sürecinde ebelerin aktif bir şekilde yer almasının önemi vurgulanmıştır.

Abstract Background An increasing number of patients are undergoing conversion surgery owing to the rising popularity of relatively strong regimens such as immune checkpoint inhibitor (ICI)-combined chemotherapy for the treatment of unresectable esophageal or esophagogastric junction (EGJ) cancer. However, the perioperative safety of conversion surgery after ICI combined with chemotherapy remains unclear. We report two cases of postoperative immune-related adverse events (irAEs) in patients who underwent conversion surgery after the induction of ICI-combined chemotherapy. Case presentations Case 1: A patient with unresectable EGJ adenocarcinoma and para-abdominal aortic lymph node (LN) metastasis developed adrenal insufficiency after four courses of nivolumab + S1 + oxaliplatin (Nivo+ SOX) therapy. As significant tumor shrinkage was observed, conversion surgery was performed. While the postoperative course was uneventful, two months after surgery, hypothyroidism developed and was determined to be an irAE. Thyroid hormone replacement therapy was administered and the symptoms improved. Case 2: A patient with EGJ adenocarcinoma and extensive metastasis to mediastinal, supraclavicular, and para-aortic LNs, along with aortic invasion, also received four courses of Nivo + SOX. Hypothyroidism developed during treatment and was managed with thyroid hormone replacement therapy. Following notable tumor regression, the patient underwent conversion surgery. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful and was discharged. However, one month after surgery, the patient was readmitted with severe respiratory distress and was diagnosed with interstitial pneumonia. Intensive care with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) was initiated following steroid and endoxan pulse therapy, but the patient died four months after surgery. Conclusions The risk of irAEs should always be considered in patients receiving ICIs, even after conversion surgery. This condition should be differentiated from complications of esophagectomy and managed promptly.

The primary complaint of patients who require bichectomy surgery is primarily related to facial esthetics, which should be considered in conjunction with the surgeon’s clinical analysis of the face. Studies are needed to evaluate the parameters associated with the buccal fat pad (BFP) volume, since there may be an erroneous indication for surgical intervention, which occurs due to the impossibility of clinically evaluating the facial anatomical layers that may be responsible for the increase in the volume of the middle third of the face, not just the BFP. This study aims to investigate whether the thickness of the subcutaneous tissue (ST) affects the excess volume in the middle third of the face. Data from ultrasound (US) measurements (volume of the buccal portion of the BFP and average thickness of the ST), as well as the age and sex of a sample of 28 patients, were extracted. The results of the statistical tests showed that there was no significant difference between the volumes of BFP right and BFP left ( P = .678), as well as no significance between ST right and ST left ( P = .088), indicating symmetry between the 2 sides of the individuals in the sample. When cross-testing between BFP and ST values on each side of the patients, it was possible to obtain some results: ST did not show a significant correlation with age, while the right BFP showed a weak tendency for a negative correlation with age; it is concluded that the volume of the middle third of the face is also related to the thickness of the ST, with US analysis being a complementary diagnostic method for indicating bichectomy.

Eccrine porocarcinoma of the eyelid is a rare and locally aggressive tumor with a significant risk of metastasis and recurrence after surgical excision. There are only eight cases of eyelid porocarcinoma reported in the literature, most involve Caucasian patients. A 58-year-old non-Caucasian male had a recurrent mass of the left upper eyelid for a year. He underwent two prior mass removal procedures in the same location of the upper eyelid. At the time of this study, the patient underwent full-thickness excision, and a lateral canthal defect with superior palpebral involvement was sacrificed. The periosteal flap from the lateral orbital rim was attached to the edge of the intact tarsal plate of the upper eyelid as a part of the defect reconstruction. Good outcomes in terms of tumor recurrences, cosmesis, and upper eyelid functionality were observed one month following surgery. According to the histopathology, the tumor was identified as eccrine porocarcinoma, and the patient was recommended for chemotherapy. The 4-month follow-up showed no recurrence or metastasis. Eccrine porocarcinoma is a rare condition that should be taken into account when making a differential diagnosis for patient with malignant eyelid tumors. Wide excision is still a treatment of choice.

Aim: This study evaluates the perceived educational value of four microanastomosis training models: the silicone tube model, the chicken wing brachial artery model, the UpSurgeOn Mycro simulator, and the Wistar Albino rat model, used within a structured microsurgical training program delivered during a national neurovascular symposium. Material and Methods: Sixteen participants completed a two-day, sixteen-hour microsurgical course that followed a stepwise training sequence. Pre-training and post-training surveys were administered for each modality using five-point Likert scales evaluating realism, technical difficulty, confidence, and overall suitability for microvascular skill development. Results: All modalities were perceived as educationally beneficial and contributed to microanastomosis skill development at different stages. The silicone tube model was viewed as highly effective for early-stage skill acquisition and basic instrument coordination. The chicken wing brachial artery model was appreciated for reproducing key biological characteristics while avoiding the logistical and ethical constraints. The Wistar Albino rat model was consistently rated as the most realistic and educationally valuable component of the training program, providing the closest approximation to operative conditions. The UpSurgeOn Mycro simulator did not meet participants expectations but served as a useful bridge between synthetic and biologic models. Conclusion: This multimodal stepwise approach to microanastomosis training was perceived as educationally valuable, with each model contributing at different stages of skill development. Based on these observations, incorporating structured simulation-based microanastomosis training into national neurosurgical education programs may help support preparedness for clinical practice.

Background: Menstrual hygiene management (MHM) is vital for the health of adolescent girls, but practices differ widely between urban and rural areas due to sociocultural, economic, and educational factors. This study compared MHM knowledge, practices, disposal methods, restrictions, and reproductive tract symptoms (RTS) among adolescent girls in urban and rural areas of Maharashtra. Methods: A community-based cross-sectional study was carried out involving 214 adolescent girls aged 12 to 19 years (107 from each area) in both urban and rural practice fields of a medical college, utilizing a non-probability chain-referral (snowball) sampling method. A validated questionnaire was employed for the survey, which took place over a period of 18 months. The data were analyzed using SPSS version 22, applying appropriate statistical tests. Results: Mothers were the main source of information in both areas. Urban girls showed higher exclusive use of sanitary pads, while rural girls often combined them with cloth. Urban girls had better genital hygiene and bathing practices (p=0.004; p&lt;0.001), but rural areas had a higher rate of proper menstrual waste disposal (55.7% versus 44.3%, p=0.001). Menstrual restrictions were more common among rural participants (p&lt;0.05). Overall, 51.9% reported at least one reproductive tract symptom, with foul-smelling discharge (p=0.007) and difficulty urinating (p=0.013) more prevalent among urban girls. Conclusions: Substantial urban-rural disparities exist in menstrual hygiene practices, disposal methods, and cultural restrictions. Strengthening school-based education, improving access to affordable sanitary materials, and addressing sociocultural barriers are crucial for improving adolescent menstrual health.

Background: Tobacco use remains a leading cause of preventable morbidity and mortality worldwide, with adolescents being particularly vulnerable to initiation. In India, rural areas report higher tobacco use prevalence, necessitating targeted interventions. This study evaluates the effectiveness of a school-based educational intervention in improving awareness of tobacco-related health effects among 12 to 16 years old schoolchildren in a rural setting. Methods: A pre-post educational interventional study was carried out among 236 schoolchildren in a rural area of Maharashtra. Baseline awareness attitudes and practices were assessed using a pre-validated questionnaire, followed by a structured educational intervention incorporating interactive audio-visual aids. Post-intervention assessments were conducted immediately and after three months. Knowledge and attitude changes were analysed using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test. Results: Baseline knowledge about tobacco was high (94.5%), but misconceptions persisted regarding its health effects and legal regulations. Post-intervention, the proportion of schoolchildren with excellent knowledge (&gt;70% score) increased from 40.7% to 48.7% in the immediate post-test but slightly declined to 45.5% at three months. Similarly, schoolchildren with an excellent attitude towards tobacco prevention improved from 66.9% at baseline to 71.4% at three months. The intervention significantly improved awareness and attitudes (p&lt;0.05), but retention declined over time, highlighting the need for reinforcement. Conclusions: The educational intervention significantly enhanced schoolchildren' knowledge and attitudes toward tobacco use and its health effects. However, knowledge retention declined after three months, underscoring the importance of periodic reinforcement. Integrating structured tobacco education into school curricula and involving parents in awareness programs could enhance the long-term impact.

Hiperurisemia atau peningkatan kadar asam urat pada lansia merupakan masalah kesehatan serius yang berdampak pada kualitas hidup dan komplikasi sistemik. Penelitian ini bertujuan menganalisis hubungan pola makan dengan kadar asam urat pada lansia di Puskesmas Pati 1. Desain penelitian ini adalah analisis korelasi dengan pendekatan cross-sectional. Populasi berjumlah 38 lansia penderita asam urat, sampel 35 responden dipilih melalui total sampling. Instrumen pengumpulan data menggunakan kuesioner Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ) dan alat pengukur Easy Touch GCU. Analisis data menggunakan uji univariat dan bivariat dengan korelasi Spearman Rank. Hasil penelitian menunjukkan 60% responden memiliki pola makan tidak baik dan 62,9% mengalami kadar asam urat tinggi. Uji Spearman Rank menghasilkan p-value 0,000 dengan koefisien korelasi r = 0,941, menunjukkan hubungan sangat kuat dan signifikan antara pola makan dengan kadar asam urat. Kesimpulannya, modifikasi pola makan merupakan strategi fundamental dalam pencegahan dan pengelolaan hiperurisemia pada lansia.

Araştırmanın amacı, dijital yönetişim uygulamaları ve örgütsel çeviklik arasındaki ilişkiyi anlamak, çalışan iç girişimcilik davranışlarının bu ilişkideki rolünü değerlendirmektir. Dijital dönüşüm süreçlerinin hız kazandığı günümüzde, örgütlerin dijital yönetişimle birlikte çeviklik kazanmaları giderek önem kazanmaktadır. Bu bağlamda, çalışan iç girişimciliğinin bu süreçteki etkisi ve önemi üzerine odaklanmak, araştırmanın ana hedefidir. Araştırmada veri toplama ve analiz yöntemi olarak nicel araştırma yöntemlerinden yararlanılarak ilişkisel tarama modeli kullanılmıştır. Araştırma İstanbul ilinde farklı sektörlerde görev alan 390 beyaz yakalı çalışan üzerinde gerçekleştirilmiştir. Veriler SPSS ve Hayes’in Process Makro istatistik programları aracılığıyla değerlendirilmiştir. Elde edilen bulgular, dijital yönetişim uygulamaları ile örgütsel çeviklik ve iç girişimcilik arasında pozitif yönlü anlamlı bir ilişki olduğunu, ayrıca iç girişimciliğin dijital dönüşüm ve örgütsel çeviklik arasındaki ilişkide kısmi aracılık rolüne sahip olduğu tespit edilmiştir.Sonuç olarak çalışanların dijital yönetişim algısının yüksek olduğu ve dijital yönetişim uygulamalarını aktif olarak uygulayan işletmelerin çevrelerinde olan değişimlere daha hızlı ve çevik cevap verme sürecinde kurum içindeki çalışanların girişimcilik ruhu ve istekliğinin de etkili olduğunu söylenebilir. Ayrıca dijital bir işyerinin çevikliğinin kurum içi girişimciliğin desteklemesine bağlı olduğu ve kurumların uygun yönetişim seviyelerini oluşturmalarının önemli olduğu bilinmelidir. Yapılan bu çalışmanın ortaya koymuş olduğu iç girişimciliğin dijital yönetişim ve örgütsel çeviklik ilişkisindeki rolünün kurumsal strateji ve politika uygulayıcılarına, dijital yönetişim uygulamalarını kurumsal kültürlerine entegre etmek isteyen işletme yönetimlerine, bu alanda çalışmak isteyen araştırmacılara yol gösterici bir kaynak olacağı düşünülmektedir.

Afet eğitimi, insanların afetler hakkındaki bilgi düzeyleri, farkındalıkları ve ilgilerini artırmayı hedeflemektedir. Afet Eğitimi Dersi kapsamında gerçekleştirilen çalışmanın temel amacı, sınıf içi eğitim ile AFAD iş birliğiyle düzenlenen saha temelli eğitim süreçlerinin, sosyal bilgiler öğretmen adaylarının afetlere yönelik algı ve farkındalıklarına olan etkisini incelemektir. Araştırma sürecinde hem bilişsel hem de duyuşsal kazanımlar dikkate alınmış, öğretmen adaylarının afetlere yönelik algı, tutum ve gönüllülük eğilimlerinde meydana gelen değişim bütüncül bir bakış açısıyla değerlendirilmiştir. Çalışmada nitel ar0aştırma desenlerinden durum çalışması kullanılmış, çalışmanın katılımcıları bir devlet üniversitesinde öğrenim gören 18, 4. sınıf sosyal bilgiler öğretmen adayı olarak belirlenmiştir. Veri toplama aracı olarak yarı yapılandırılmış görüşme formu kullanılmış ve elde edilen veriler betimsel analiz yöntemi ile değerlendirilmiştir. Araştırmanın bulguları, öğretmen adaylarının hem Türkiye'de hem de dünyada en sık karşılaşılan afet türleri olarak deprem ve seli algıladıklarını ortaya çıkarmıştır. Heyelan, yangın ve çığ gibi afetler ise daha az sıklıkla ifade edilmiştir. Afetlerin nedenlerine ilişkin öğretmen adaylarının görüşlerinde hem doğal (iklim değişikliği, tektonik hareketler) hem de beşeri (ihmal, bilinçsizlik, yerleşim sorunları) faktörlere vurgu yapılmıştır. Afetlerin mekânsal dağılımına ilişkin olarak Pasifik Ateş Çemberi, Japonya ve Türkiye gibi yüksek riskli bölgelerin ifade edildiği görülmektedir. AFAD eğitimi öğretmen adaylarının afetlerle ilgili bilgi ve farkındalık düzeylerini artırmış, ayrıca afet yardım çalışmalarına gönüllü olarak katılma konusunda olumlu tutum geliştirmelerine etkide bulunmuştur. AFAD eğitiminin afet dersinden elde edilen bilgileri pekiştirdiği ve teorik bilgileri deneyimsel öğrenme yoluyla desteklediği ortaya çıkmıştır.

Online communication often serves as the primary outlet for individuals with hemorrhoids to share experiences, seek advice, and receive social support due to the stigmatized nature of these health conditions. Using stigma management communication theory, this study conducted an analysis via Leximancer to investigate how participants in r/hemorrhoid discussed their health condition while managing stigma. Three stigma management communication strategies — displaying, refocusing, and bonding — prevailed across five identified thematic clusters: (1) symptom disclosures, (2) adaptation, (3) assessment, (4) social dynamics, and (5) sexual and reproductive health. Findings from this study can extend our understanding of stigma management communication, disclosure, recovery, and supportive communication. These insights can inform health campaigns and healthcare providers to increase awareness, improve access to accurate information, and destigmatize discussions surrounding hemorrhoids.

Abstract This research paper investigates health issues and healthcare accessibility among tribal communities in six districts of Madhya Pradesh—Jhabua, Ratlam, Khandwa, Khargone, Alirajpur, and Dhar. Using a descriptive survey design, data was collected through structured interviews. Sample selected was total 120 respondents (20 per district). A multistage stratified sampling method ensured representation at the district, village, and household levels. Data collection instruments included standardized checklists, health assessments, and socioeconomic surveys. Descriptive statistics (means, percentages, frequencies) were used to illustrate demographic, socioeconomic, and health trends, while inferential analyses (chi-square tests and correlations) explored relationships between socioeconomic status, education, health outcomes, and healthcare accessibility. Findings reveal persistent health challenges, limited access to healthcare services, and strong associations between socioeconomic factors and health outcomes. The study underscores the urgent need for culturally sensitive healthcare interventions, improved infrastructure, and targeted delivery models to address health disparities among indigenous populations.

ABSTRACT Combined events are an Athletics discipline with specific and particular challenges for performance and health, supporting the interest of focused research on this discipline, despite concerning a small proportion of athletes. The study aim was to summarize and map the available scientific literature on performance and health of combined events to establish the current level of understanding and identify knowledge gaps that require further investigation. A scoping review was conducted searching peer‐reviewed articles dealing with performance and/or health in combined events (i.e., pentathlon, heptathlon or decathlon) on the MEDLINE (via PubMed), EMBASE (via Ovid), Web of Science, and Google Scholar databases, from inception to October 13, 2025. In total, 111 articles were included, with 95.5% as primary research, 95.5% using quantitative approach, 22.5% with a level of evidence 1b and 48.6% 2b, and 56.8% with study aim(s) focused on combined events understanding and/or analyzing. 64.0% articles dealt with performance and 59.5% with health, including 23.4% dealing with both. Regarding performance, the majority of articles dealt with performance analysis/tactics/data management (56.3%), followed by physiology (21.1%), and nutrition (11.3%). Regarding health, the majority of articles dealt with injuries (62.1%), followed by physiology (22.7%), illnesses (18.2%), and nutrition (12.1%). These findings (i) can help to suggest some clinical implications for performance enhancement and health protection, and (ii) highlighted the need for continuing research on performance and/or health in combined events, preferably with prospective design, large athletes' sample sizes, focused on underrepresented populations (e.g., women, adolescents, Masters athletes), over one or more Athletics season.

Efek Samping Obat (ESO) merupakan salah satu bagian dari Drug Related Problems (DRPs) yang menjadi masalah penting dikesehatan masyarakat. ESO menjadi salah satu penyebab utama rawat inap dan penyebab morbiditas kelima di negara-negara maju. Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mengetahui jumlah kejadian ESO dan tingkat keparahan ESO pada pasien rawat inap di Bangsal Penyakit Dalam. Penelitian ini menggunakan studi observational dengan metode cross sectional. Pengambilan data secara prospektif selama periode Desember 2023 hingga Januari 2024. ESO dinilai kausalitasnya menggunakan algoritma Naranjo. Penelitian ini melibatkan 108 pasien rawat inap yang memenuhi kriteria inklusi. Angka kejadian ESO pada penelitian ini sebesar 41 pasien (38,0%) dengan 46 kejadian. Manifestasi ESO paling sering terjadi yaitu respons hipersensitivitas (23,91%), diikuti oleh kejadian hipoglikemia (13,04%) dan hipotensi (13,04%). Kulit dan jaringan subkutan merupakan organ yang paling sering terkena dampak ESO (30,43%), sementara antibiotik sistemik merupakan jenis obat yang paling sering menyebabkan ESO (17,39%). Penilaian kausalitas menggunakan algoritma Naranjo menunjukkan bahwa 78,26% kasus probable dan 21,74% kasus possible dengan tingkat keparahan mild (47,83%) dan moderate (52,17%). Pemantauan kejadian ESO sebagai informasi bagi praktisi kesehatan untuk mewaspadai potensi ESO, meningkatkan pelaporan ESO, dan memantau terapi pasien secara lebih komprehensif.

Background: Subgingival biofilm removal represent the most important step in periodontitis treatment. However, its mechanical removal becomes difficult and frequently incomplete in deep periodontal pockets. Aim: To evaluate the clinical and microbiological effect of amino acid buffered sodium hypochlorite (NaOCl) gel application in minimally invasive non-surgical therapy for management of in type 2diabetic patients with periodontitis stage II grade B. Methods: The study was carried out on a total number of forty subjects of both genders, with age ranged between 25 to 45 years old that divided into two equal groups. Group I (Diabetic group) and Group II (Non diabetic group).Subgingival plaque samples were collected at baseline, 6 and 12 weeks using sterile paper points and transported in thioglycolate broth. Samples were processed within 2 hours for quantitative culture on modified blood agar under anaerobic conditions, Colony-forming units (CFU) and the total bacterial count were calculated. Identification of P. gingivalis and P. intermedia was confirmed by species-specific PCR and gel electrophoresis (404 bp and 575 bp, respectively)

Lassa fever is a viral hemorrhagic illness that is transmitted by rodents and has been recognized to have long-term complications, almost exclusively affecting survivors and their experience of permanent hearing loss. This study explores integrating epidemic dynamics with intervention strategies to mitigate the emerging, yet neglected, outcome of Lassa virus infection. A population-based model with genderspecific and special groups for people with hearing loss due to the disease is developed and analyzed. The model includes male-female and rodent-to-person modes of transmission and accounts for nonlinear saturation effects in disease spread. Empirical data are used to calibrate the model and identify key factors that significantly affect disease spread and disability. Five control interventions are proposed and evaluated to reduce person-to-person and rodent-to-human transmission, improve treatment and recovery, and minimize disability progression. Numerical simulations demonstrate that timely, combined interventions can significantly reduce infection rates and the number of individuals who develop hearing loss. It emphasizes the interconnection between epidemic control and disability prevention, thereby providing a valuable framework for more holistic public health planning in endemic regions.

Bu makale, mütekaddimîn dönemi Eş‘arî kelamında hikmet kavramının mahiyetini ve bu kavramın ilâhî fiillere nasıl uygulandığını tartışmaktadır. Makalenin temel sorunsalı, ilâhî bir fiilin hikmetli olarak nitelendirilmesini sağlayan unsurların mahiyetidir. Kelâm ekolleri Allah’ın “hakîm” sıfatıyla nitelenmesi konusunda ittifak etseler de hikmetin tanımı ve ilâhî fiillerdeki anlamı hususunda fikir ayrılıkları yaşamışlardır. Bu bağlamda hikmet kavramına dair birbirinden farklı iki yaklaşım içerinde bulunan Eş‘ariyye ve Mu’tezile ekollerinin görüşleri Eş‘ariyye’nin Mu’tezile eleştirisi üzerinden ele alınmıştır. Eş‘arîler, Allah’ın fiillerinin hikmet çerçevesinde gerçekleştirdiğini kabul etmekle birlikte, bu hikmetin anlamını Mu‘tezile'nin ileri sürdüğü gibi salt fayda temelli olarak değil; Allah’ın irade ve ilmine mutabık olarak gerçekleşmesi şeklinde yorumlamışlardır. Ortaya koymuş oldukları görüşleri itibariyle ilâhî fiillerdeki hikmeti âleme yansıyan bir nizam çerçevesinde değerlendirmişlerdir. Eş’arîlere göre Allah’ın fiillerinin sonucu itibariyle kula yönelik birtakım faydalar söz konusu ise de Mu‘tezile’nin iddia ettiği gibi her fiilini zorunlu olarak faydayı gözeterek yapmaz. Mu‘tezile düşüncesinde adalet ilkesinin bir uzantısı olarak şekillenen, ilâhî fiilleri garaz ve illet kavramlarına bağlı olarak fayda üzerinden açıklanan hikmet yaklaşımına karşı Eş‘arîler, başta istidlâl bi’ş-şâhid ale’l-gâib yönteminin bu bağlamda geçersizliğini savunarak hüsün-kubuh ve salah-aslah problemleri üzerinden Mu‘tezileye itiraz ederler. Eş‘arî kelamcılar, ilâhî fiillerin bir amaca (garaz) yönelmiş olmasının Allah’ı ihtiyaç sahibi kılacağını ve bu durumun O’nun yüceliliği ile çelişeceğini belirtmişlerdir. Bu itibarla da ilâhî fiillerde garaz ve illet kavramları yerine irade kavramının kullanılması gerektiğini savunmuşlardır. Bu doğrultuda makale, Eş‘arîlerin irade merkezli Tanrı tasavvuru çerçevesinde, Mu’tezile’nin ilâhî fiilleri şâhid âlemden hareketle fayda odaklı sınırlandırmaya karşı sunmuş oldukları eleştiriyi ortaya koymaktadır. Ayrıca, ilâhî fiillerde fayda aramanın ya da aslah olanın yapılmasını zorunlu görmenin, Allah’ın fiillerini belirli bir ahlâkî zorunlulukla sınırlamak anlamına geleceği eleştirisi öne çıkar. Eş‘arîlerin bu bağlamda başvurduğu temel argümanları; salah-aslah tartışmaları bağlamında faydayı hikmetin ölçütü saymanın, Tanrı’nın irade ve kudretine bir tür sınırlama getirdiği yönündeki eleştiriler ele alınmıştır. Özellikle salah-aslah tartışmaları bağlamında, dünyadaki acıların, hastalıkların ve kâfirlerin yaratılması gibi olguların salt insan merkezli bir fayda anlayışıyla açıklanamayacağını; hikmetin ölçütünün fayda olarak kabul edilmesiyle, Allah’ın insanları imtihan zorluğuna tabi tutmaksızın doğrudan cennette yaratması gerektiğini savunmuşlardır. Sonuç olarak bu çalışma, Eş‘arî ekolünün hikmeti, ilâhî fiillerin değerini faydaya dayandırmaksızın, Allah’ın ezelî ilmi ve iradesiyle temellendirdiğini ve bu yönüyle hikmeti kullara yönelik faydadan bağımsız, Allah’ın fiillerinde ahlâkî veya aklî zorunluluk değil, mutlak irade ve ezelî ilmin belirleyici olduğu bir ilkeye dayandırdığını ortaya koymaktadır. Bu yaklaşım, Eş‘arî kelamının Tanrı tasavvurunda irade ve kudret merkezli paradigmanın belirleyiciliğini yansıtır.

Sülükler (hirudinea) tabiatta parazit olarak bulunan, phylum annelida grubundan kan emici hermafrodit parazitlerdir. Sülükler genellikle kaynak sularda ve kirli su birikintilerinde yaşar. İnsanlara bulaş bu tür suların kullanılması, içilmesi veya bu sularda yüzülmesi sonucu oluşmaktadır. Genellikle oral ya da nazal kavite ile vucüda giriş yapar, tutunduğu bölgeye göre farklı şikayetlere yol açar. Biz bu olgu sunumunda nadir görülen 67 yaşında nazofarenkste sülük vakasını sunduk.

The comprehensive treatment approach demonstrated effectiveness in improving clinical and imaging outcomes in patients with CCS dependence. However, complete recovery of striatal DAT availability and related parameters was not achieved for these patients. TRODAT SPECT brain imaging was proven to be a useful imaging modality for assessment of the effectiveness of treatment methods in CCS dependence.

<title>Abstract</title> Background Nursing education is adapting to advancing healthcare technologies and changing patient needs. Self-directed learning (SDL) is essential for fostering lifelong learning among nursing students. Game-based learning (GBL) has emerged as a novel approach to improve engagement and SDL skills, yet its effectiveness against traditional methods in nursing undergraduates is still not well studied. Methods This study is a prospective, randomized, controlled trial aimed at evaluating the effectiveness of game-based learning (GBL) as an innovative self-directed learning strategy compared to conventional self-directed learning (SDL) in nursing education. Conducted at Smt. Radhikabai Meghe Memorial College of Nursing in India, it involved 140 nursing undergraduates who were randomly assigned to either an experimental group using an antimicrobial stewardship game or a control group utilizing traditional learning materials. Each participant attended a 90-minute orientation session before beginning a 12-week intervention period. The study focused on measuring SDL abilities through the Self-Directed Learning Instrument (SDLI) and knowledge acquisition with a questionnaire specifically targeting antimicrobial resistance and stewardship. Secondary outcomes included assessments of perceived cognitive, affective, and psychomotor learning via the CAP Perceived learning scale. Statistical analyses employed R software, utilizing nonparametric tests and ANCOVA models to adjust for baseline differences and covariates, with a significance level set at p &lt; 0.05. Results At the 12-week follow-up, the experimental group showed significantly higher median knowledge scores (12.0 vs. 9.0, p &lt; 0.001) and SDLI scores (72.0 vs. 59.0, p &lt; 0.001) compared to the control group. ANCOVA analysis indicated a significant adjusted mean difference for knowledge (-3.1, p &lt; 0.001) and SDLI (-12.3, p &lt; 0.001). All secondary outcomes also demonstrated significant improvements in the experimental group (all p &lt; 0.001), with sensitivity analyses affirming the robustness of these findings across various statistical models. Conclusion Game-based learning significantly improves knowledge acquisition and self-directed learning in undergraduate nursing students over traditional methods, and its incorporation into nursing curricula is advised to develop essential lifelong learning skills for the evolving healthcare sector. Trial registration number: Trial Registered Prospectively at Clinical Trials Registry - India [CTRI/2024/01/061599 (Registered on: 18/01/2024)] ; URL: https://ctri.nic.in/Clinicaltrials/rmaindet.php?trialid=92950&amp;EncHid=87481.96317&amp;modid=1&amp;compid=19

1879-1925 yılları arasında Kaçar Şahının emrinde görevlendirilen İran Kazak Tugayı düzenli ordu teşkilatının İran’daki en önemli temsilcisidir. Bu birlik Çarlık Rus ordusunun önemli silah gücü olan Rus Kazak Tugayı örneğinde ve Rus hükümetinin desteğiyle kurulmuştur. Nasırüddin Şah birliğin teşekkülünü ülkede bir süredir devam eden ordu reformları kapsamında planlamıştır. Kısa zamanda devletin öncelikli birliği haline gelmiş ve iç muhalefete karşı şahlık rejiminin yegâne savunucusu olmuştur. İran Kazak Tugayı’nın bu tercihinde tugaydan sorumlu albay ve eğitici subayların Ruslardan oluşmasının etkisi büyüktür. Zira Rusya İran’daki çıkarları uğruna muhalefete ve meşrutiyet sistemine karşı daima şahın yanında yer almıştır. Osmanlı arşiv kayıtlarında İran Kazak askerlerinin iki ülkenin sınırlarında görev yaptıklarını, Rusya’nın İran’daki askeri operasyonlarına dâhil olduklarını ve iltica hadiselerinde adlarının geçtiğini görmekteyiz. Bu içerikte evraklar en erken 1903 yılına ait olup 1917 yılına kadar devamlılık göstermiştir. Ayrıca İran Kazak Tugayı ile ilgili gelişmeler genellikle Osmanlı’nın Tahran sefiri ve ilgili şehbenderlerin istihbarat çalışmaları olarak arşiv kayıtlarına yansımıştır.

Purpose: To compare mean IOP changes following PPV using 1000 CST and 5000 CST silicone oil in patients with superior Rhegmatogenous Retinal Detachment (RRD). Study Design: Quasi experimental study. Place and Duration of Study: Layton Rahmatullah Benevolent Trust (LRBT) from January 2024 to June 2024. Methods: A total of 150 patients with age range of 21 to 70 years, diagnosed with superior rhegmatogenous retinal detachment (RRD) and proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR) of grade B or C, were recruited. They were divided into two groups; Group A underwent vitrectomy with 1000 centistokes (cSt) and Group B had 5000 cSt silicone oil as tamponade. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was measured before and at 6, 12, 24, and 48 hours after surgery. Independent sample t-test was used to compare the results with p-value of ≤0.05 as significant. Results: The mean age was comparable between the two groups (Group A: 44.64 ± 14.71 years; Group B: 44.76 ± 14.09 years). A postoperative increase in IOP was observed in both groups. However, at 24 and 48 hours, Group B demonstrated significantly higher IOP compared to Group A, with mean values of 19.34 ± 0.86 vs. 18.64 ± 0.61 mmHg (p = 0.001) and 19.70 ± 1.09 vs. 19.22 ± 0.92 mmHg (p = 0.004), respectively. Conclusion: Both 1000 cSt and 5000 cSt silicone oil lead to IOP elevation after PPV, but the increase is more significant and sustained in the 5000 cSt group. Careful IOP monitoring is recommended, especially in patients receiving high-viscosity silicone oil.

This research was conducted in order to determine the relationship between loneliness level and death anxiety in older adults and its effect on successful aging. The sample in this descriptive, cross-sectional, correlational research consisted of 235 older adults. The data were collected using an information form, the Loneliness Scale for Older Adults, the Death Anxiety Scale, and the Successful Aging Scale. Analyses were performed using Student’s t-test, One-Way ANOVA, the Mann Whitney U and Kruskal Wallis tests, Pearson correlation analysis, and Linear regression analysis. The mean age of the older adults included in the research was 71.88±4.37 years, 51.9% were women, and 89.4% were married. The participants’ mean Loneliness Scale for Older Adults score was 12.17±6.96, their mean Death Anxiety Scale score was 40.08±16.37, and their mean Successful Aging Score was 52.30±6.96. Negative correlations were determined between loneliness levels and successful aging, and between death anxiety levels and successful aging. Older adults experienced an acceptable level of loneliness, this being highest in social relationships. They also experienced a moderate level of death anxiety, and their successful aging scores were above average.

Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mengetahui pengaruh respon fisiologis terhadap kualitas semen ayam kampung (Gallus gallus domesticus). Ayam kampung jantan 15 ekor yang dipelihara dalam kendang individu digunakan dalam penelitian ini. Variabel respon fisiologis yang diamati meliputi denyut jantung, frekuensi pernapasan, dan suhu rektal. Segera setelah pengamatan respon fisiologis dilakukan koleksi semen dengan metode pemijatan dan dilakukan evaluasi semen. Parameter kualitas semen meliputi motilitas spermatozoa, volume semen, pH semen, dan konsentrasi spermatozoa. Data respon fisiologis dan kualitas semen disajikan secara deskriptif kemudian dianalisis menggunakan metode regresi linier sederhana. Rata-rata denyut jantung ayam kampung 259,6 kali/menit, frekuensi pernapasan 33 kali/menit dan suhu rektal 41,41 °C. Rata-rata volume semen 0,26 ml, pH semen 7,32, konsentrasi 3,08 milyar/ml, dan motilitas spermatozoa 86% . Hasil analisis regresi menunjukkan bahwa tidak terdapat pengaruh yang signifikan signifikan antara denyut jantung, frekuensi pernapasan, dan suhu rektal terhadap seluruh parameter kualitas semen. Hasil ini mengindikasikan tidak adanya hubungan antara kualitas semen dengan respon fisiologis yang diukur sesaat sebelum proses koleksi semen.

Background: Antenatal care (ANC) is a crucial component of maternal health services, aiming to ensure the health of both the mother and the newborn during pregnancy. It serves as a comprehensive health service designed to detect, prevent, and manage complications during pregnancy, ultimately promoting positive maternal and neonatal outcomes. Methods: A community-based cross-sectional study, conducted from February to May 2024 in Bosaso, Somalia, aimed to assess the knowledge, attitudes, and practices regarding ANC among pregnant women. A total of 384 participants were selected using clustered and systematic sampling from four villages in Bosaso. Data was collected through a structured pre-tested questionnaire and analyzed using statistical package for the social sciences (SPSS) version 21. Descriptive statistics, frequencies, and percentages were computed to assess ANC knowledge, attitude, and practice levels and correlation tests were conducted to explore associations between them. Results: Most respondents were aware of ANC services (86.5%), with healthcare providers as the primary information source (46.4%). While many recognized the importance of ANC checkups (89.3%) and followed recommended practices, only 17% adhered to the ideal frequency of four or more visits. Statistically significant correlations were found between knowledge, attitude, and practice (p&lt;0.01), indicating that awareness positively influences ANC practices. Conclusion: This study highlights that the adherence to recommended visits remains low. A significant gap exists between ANC initiation and completion, with barriers to access and awareness. Strengthening knowledge, attitudes, and targeted interventions, such as community support and mobile reminders, could improve ANC utilization and maternal health outcomes.

Introduction: Guillain Barre Syndrome or GBS is an acute immune mediated polyradiculoneuropathy which continues to be a serious problem worldwide ,causing respiratory insufficiency requiring mechanical ventilation in up to 30 percent of patients. This study aims to look at the clinico epidemiological profile and treatment outcome in GBS patients admitted in a tertiary level hospital in India. Methods: We conducted a retrospective study of adult patients with Guillain barre Syndome admitted at MOSC Hospital Kolenchery, Kerala, a tertiary care centre in south India, from January 2021 to January 2024. The case records of the study population were retrieved from medical records department and the clinical profile and outcomes were studied. Results: A total of 28 patients were recruited on the study of which 17 (61%) were male and 11 female. The mean age of the study population was found to be 50 years. A preceding history of infection was found in 68% of patients and included respiratory infections and gastroenteritis. Limb weakness was the most common symptom noted followed by sensory symptoms including pain and paraesthesiae in the extremities. Intravenous immunoglobulin was the most common treatment modality given in 65% of patients. The most common clinical variant was Acute Motor Axonal Neuropathy(AMAN) seen in 54% of patients followed by the demyelinating and bulbar onset forms. Ventilatory support was needed in 18% of patients and no cases of mortality were reported in the study population. Good treatment outcomes as calculated by the Hughes disability grading was achieved in 71 % of patients. Significant association was found between male sex and good outcomes. Conclusions: Guillain Barre syndrome affects patients of all ages with a male predominance and a preceding infection seen in the majority of patients. Axonal form of GBS is the most common variety seen and a good outcome is noted in the majority of patients.

ABSTRACT Background Paediatric orbital abscesses represent true emergencies requiring immediate recognition and multidisciplinary management to prevent permanent vision loss and life‐threatening complications. Methods We present three paediatric cases of orbital abscess (ages two, six, and eight years) presenting to emergency departments. Cases were analysed for emergency presentation patterns, imaging findings, and treatment outcomes. Results All patients presented with periorbital swelling and fever, and all three cases originated from odontogenic infections. Emergency CT imaging was crucial for diagnosis. Multidisciplinary management involving emergency medicine, ENT, and maxillofacial surgery achieved excellent outcomes with no visual or neurological complications. Conclusions Emergency physicians must maintain high clinical suspicion for orbital abscess in children with periorbital swelling and fever. Immediate CT imaging, broad‐spectrum antibiotics, and emergency surgical interventions can prevent catastrophic complications.

The School Health Program (UKS) is a government initiative that plays a strategic role in promoting early health prevention and supporting long-term public health outcomes. This study examines the effectiveness of health administration in implementing the UKS program at elementary and secondary school levels, focusing on planning, organizing, implementation, and evaluation. A descriptive quantitative approach was employed using questionnaires completed by 30 respondents. The study highlights the significance of health administration as a crucial mechanism for translating policy objectives into effective operational practices within the school setting. The results show that the UKS program is generally well implemented, with 53.3% of respondents rating it as very good and 33.3% as good. UKS facilities and access to health personnel are considered adequate, and health services are responsive and student-friendly. These findings indicate that the foundational administrative structures and resources required to support UKS implementation are primarily in place at the school level. However, challenges remain, including irregular implementation of activities, limited student participation, and inconsistent evaluation. Collaboration with external health institutions also requires improvement. These constraints suggest that administrative effectiveness remains limited at the operational stage, particularly in ensuring continuity, stakeholder engagement, and the systematic monitoring of program activities. Overall, the UKS program has a positive influence on students’ knowledge, attitudes, and clean and healthy living behaviors (PHBS). This positive impact highlights the potential of school-based health programs to serve as effective entry points for health promotion among adolescents when supported by strong administrative management. Strengthening administrative management, evaluation systems, student engagement, and intersectoral coordination is crucial to enhancing the effectiveness and sustainability of the program and its contribution to broader public health objectives. The findings of this study provide practical implications for policymakers and school administrators in designing strategies to optimize UKS governance and maximize its role in improving student health outcomes.

Introducción: El 90-95% de los pacientes con trastorno del espectro autista padece un trastorno del procesamiento sensorial, que puede desembocar en alteraciones del comportamiento y dificultades en el desarrollo de las habilidades motoras. Se han desarrollado terapias como la Terapia de Integración Sensorial con resultados esperanzadores para estos pacientes, por lo que es necesario realizar más investigaciones con el fin de confirmar estos efectos. Objetivo: Conocer la eficacia de la Terapia de Integración Sensorial en las áreas de ocupación y/o la calidad de vida de niños con autismo. Metodología: Se realizó una búsqueda bibliográfica en las bases de datos Medline, OTseeker, Cochrane y PEDro. Aplicando los criterios de inclusión y exclusión previamente definidos, se obtuvieron 8 artículos publicados entre 2008 y 2023, y todos ellos pasaron la evaluación metodológica CASPe. Resultados: Todos los estudios muestran efectos positivos en las áreas de ocupación de los pacientes tras la intervención con Terapia de Integración Sensorial, aunque estos cambios no siempre se consideran significativos. Conclusión: Se deben seguir realizando estudios con mayor muestra poblacional y mayor tiempo de tratamiento. Además de seguir investigando sobre el efecto de la Terapia de Integración Sensorial en pacientes de otras edades y con otras patologías del neurodesarrollo.

Kepatuhan mengonsumsi Tablet Tambah Darah (TTD) merupakan salah satu faktor penting dalam mencegah anemia pada ibu hamil yang dapat berdampak pada peningkatan risiko komplikasi kehamilan, persalinan, bahkan kematian ibu dan bayi. Tujuan dari penelitian ini Untuk mengetahui hubungan sikap, pengetahuan, dan dukungan keluarga secara simulat dengan kepatuhan mengkonsumsi tablet tambah darah pada ibu hamil di Puskesmas Pegayut kabupaten Ogan Ilir Tahun 2025. Faktor yang mempengaruhi kepatuhan mengonsumsi tablet tambah darah pada ibu hamil meliputi: kunjungan antenatal care (ANC), peran tenaga kesehatan, umur, dukungan keluarga, paritas, pendidikan, sikap, dan pengetahuan ibu hamil mengenai tablet besi. Penelitian ini menggunakan pendekatan crosss sectional yang dilakukan di Puskesmas Pegayut Kabupaten Ogan Ilir pada tanggal 27 Agustus-2 September tahun 2025. Dengan menggunakan analisis univariat dan bivariat. Hasil 28 responden (50,0%) tidak patuh. Sebagian besar 27 responden (48,2%) yang memiliki pengetahuan kurang, 30 responden memiliki sikap negatif dan 28 responden (50,0%) tidak mendukung. Berdasarkan uji chi-square diketahui bahwa ada hubungan pengetahuan dengan kepatuhan mengonsumsi tablet tambah darah diperoleh nilai p-value = 0,000 (&lt;0,05), ada hubungan signifikan antara sikap ibu hamil dengan kepatuhan konsumsi tablet tambah darah diperoleh nilai (p-value = 0,000 &lt; 0,05), terdapat hubungan yang signifikan antara dukungan keluarga dengan kepatuhan konsumsi tablet tambah darah diperoleh nilai p-value = 0,000 (&lt;0,05). Dapat disimpulkan bahwa ada hubungan pengetahuan, Sikap dan dukungan keluarga secara simultan dengan kepatuhan mengonsumsi tablet tambbah darah pada ibu hamil. Saran untuk Tenaga kesehatan dipuskesmas pegayut kabupaten ogan ilir untuk meningkatkan penyuluhan dan konseling mengenai kepatuhan mengonsumsi tablet tambah darah pada ibu hamil serta strategi untuk mengatasi kejadian anemia yang meningkat.

Humoral and cellular immune responses after two heterogenous bivalent vaccines were noninferior to those after a single bivalent vaccine within four months of vaccination. Continued surveillance of vaccine immunogenicity is essential to inform evidence-based decisions on vaccination of vulnerable older adults.

Background: Preterm birth remains a major global health concern and is a leading cause of neonatal morbidity and mortality. Cranial ultrasound (USG), being a safe, non-invasive, and bedside-available imaging tool, is widely used for screening and monitoring brain abnormalities in preterm infants. In tertiary care settings, where high-risk neonates are managed, understanding the spectrum of cranial USG findings can guide clinicians in decision-making and follow-up planning. Aims and Objectives: This study aims to assess the different clinical presentations of neonates with abnormal cranial USG. Materials and Methods: The observational descriptive study was conducted in the special newborn care unit/neonatal intensive care unit (SNCU/NICU) of Malda Medical College and Hospital for the period of 1 year. Preterm neonates admitted to SNCU/NICU were included. The first consecutive 100 preterm newborns admitted during the study period in SNCU/NICU from 15 December 2022 to 14 December 2023 were taken. Results: In this study, the majority of the cases were males (68%), and 17% of the cases, parents were married within 18 years. For most (60%) of the cases, gestational age was ≤32 weeks. Regarding cranial USG findings, abnormality was seen in 21% of cases. The gestational age and birth weight had a significant association with cranial USG findings. Conclusion: Cranial USG helps in early identification of neurological abnormalities among preterm as well as term neonates because of its high efficiency. Early identification of such abnormalities will help to prevent, protect, and further manage adversely affected infants. The same was observed in this study.

ABSTRACT Background Rapid and accurate detection and identification of viral pathogens have an impact on physician decision‐making for patients with acute respiratory illness (ARI). We aimed to evaluate the Xpert Xpress Flu/RSV test for the management of antibiotic prescribing in pediatric outpatients with ARI. Methods We performed a prospective, quasi‐randomized, controlled study in Beijing Children's Hospital between December 1, 2021 and April 28, 2022. Outpatients with ARI aged 28 days to 18 years were enrolled and randomly assigned to the Xpert Xpress Flu/RSV test (Xpert) group or the influenza (Flu) antigen test (control) group. Both tests were performed on site. Results A total of 771 patients were enrolled and assigned randomly to the Xpert ( n = 398) and the control ( n = 373) groups. There was no statistically significant difference in antibiotic prescriptions between the two groups, whereas a significant difference was observed for the prescriptions of oseltamivir ( p &lt; 0.001). In Flu B‐positive patients, a statistically significant decrease in antibiotic use and increase in antiviral use were observed in both Xpert and control groups. Cephalosporin use was significantly decreased in respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)‐positive patients in the Xpert group before ( n = 8, 17.4%) and after ( n = 1, 2.2%)visit ( p = 0.035). Among clinical and laboratory parameters, shorter fever length (OR = 0.366) and positive Flu B or RSV (OR = 3.99) were two independent factors for antibiotic withdrawal by logistic regression analysis. There was no significant difference in duration of fever, clinical outcomes, and expenditure between the two groups at the 7‐day and 30‐day follow‐up. Conclusions Use of Xpert Xpress Flu/RSV at point‐of‐care in pediatric outpatients with ARI reduced antibiotic prescription, which has the potential to improve antibiotic stewardship.

การวิจัยนี้มีวัตถุประสงค์ 1) เพื่อสร้างและหาคุณภาพของหน่วยการเรียนรู้เชิงสถานการณ์ เพื่อส่งเสริมทักษะพูดภาษาอังกฤษในสถานประกอบการ สำหรับนักเรียนระดับประกาศนียบัตรวิชาชีพ 2) เพื่อศึกษาผลการใช้หน่วยการเรียนรู้โดยใช้สถานการณ์เป็นฐาน เพื่อส่งเสริมทักษะพูดภาษาอังกฤษในสถานประกอบการ สำหรับนักเรียนระดับประกาศนียบัตรวิชาชีพ กับเกณฑ์ร้อยละ 70 และ 3) เพื่อศึกษาความพึงพอใจของนักเรียนที่มีต่อการจัดการเรียนรู้โดยใช้หน่วยการเรียนรู้โดยใช้สถานการณ์เป็นฐาน เพื่อส่งเสริมทักษะพูดภาษาอังกฤษในสถานประกอบการ สำหรับนักเรียนระดับประกาศนียบัตรวิชาชีพ กลุ่มตัวอย่าง คือ นักเรียนระดับประกาศนียบัตรวิชาชีพชั้นปีที่ 2 แผนกช่างยนต์ วิทยาลัยเทคนิคสิงห์บุรี ภาคเรียนที่ 1 ปีการศึกษา 2567 จำนวน 33 คน โดยการสุ่มแบบแบ่งกลุ่ม (Cluster random sampling) เครื่องมือที่ใช้ในการวิจัย ได้แก่ 1) แบบประเมินความเหมาะสมของหน่วยการเรียนรู้โดยใช้สถานการณ์เป็นฐาน 2) หน่วยการเรียนรู้โดยใช้สถานการณ์เป็นฐาน และแบบประเมินวัดความสามารถด้านการพูด 3) แบบประเมินความพึงพอใจ สถิติที่ใช้ในการวิเคราะห์ข้อมูล ได้แก่ ค่าเฉลี่ย ส่วนเบี่ยงเบนมาตรฐาน และ One sample t-test ผลการศึกษา พบว่า 1) หน่วยการเรียนรู้และองค์ประกอบของหน่วยการเรียนรู้โดยใช้สถานการณ์เป็นฐาน เพื่อส่งเสริมทักษะพูดภาษาอังกฤษในสถานประกอบการ สำหรับนักเรียนระดับประกาศนียบัตรวิชาชีพ ( = 4.23, SD = 0.35) อยู่ในระดับเหมาะสมมาก 2) ค่าเฉลี่ยของคะแนนการทดสอบหลังเรียน ( = 77.61, SD = 3.36) สูงกว่าเกณฑ์ร้อยละ 70 อย่างมีนัยสำคัญทางสถิติที่ระดับ .01 และ3) ความพึงพอใจที่มีต่อการจัดการเรียนรู้โดยใช้หน่วยการเรียนรู้โดยใช้สถานการณ์เป็นฐานเพื่อส่งเสริมทักษะพูดภาษาอังกฤษในสถานประกอบการ สำหรับนักเรียนระดับประกาศนียบัตรวิชาชีพ ( = 4.55, SD = 0.81) อยู่ในระดับมากที่สุด

Background Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) and interstitial cystitis/bladder pain syndrome (IC/BPS) are chronic conditions that significantly impact patients’ quality of life. OSA involves recurrent upper airway obstruction during sleep, causing hypoxia and fragmented sleep linked to cardiovascular and metabolic issues. IC/BPS is defined by chronic pelvic pain and urinary symptoms; its pathophysiology is complex and poorly understood. The overlap in the prevalence of OSA and IC/BPS suggests a possible shared pathophysiological link. This study aimed to identify shared molecular mechanisms and diagnostic biomarkers between OSA and IC/BPS through integrated bioinformatics approaches. Methods This study used bioinformatics and machine learning to analyze transcriptomic data for OSA and IC/BPS, identifying differential expressed genes (DEGs) and enriched pathways from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. Weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) constructed gene co-expression networks and identified hub genes, while immune infiltration analysis characterized the immune microenvironment. Four machine learning algorithms developed diagnostic models and also identified key markers. Results A total of 2,233 DEGs were identified in OSA and 1,183 in IC/BPS, with 93 overlapping genes. Among these, machine learning algorithms identified DUSP9 as the single common gene linking both disorders, forming two-gene signatures for each condition ( DUSP9 / CCDC68 for OSA and DUSP9 / KPNA2 for IC/BPS). Key pathways for OSA included RIG-I-like and NOD-like receptor signaling. In contrast, IC/BPS was linked to cytokine interactions and JAK-STAT signaling. Immune infiltration analysis showed that DUSP9 expression was correlated with CD56dim natural killer cells in OSA and with activated CD4 T cells in IC/BPS, further supporting its role in the immune response associated with these disorders. Conclusions This study established DUSP9 as a pivotal shared biomarker and central regulator linking OSA and IC/BPS through integrated bioinformatics analysis.

Abstract Background Stunting is one of the most severe and slightly addressed children health problems in Ethiopia in general and the Amhara region in particular, Suitable feeding set pre-requisite for decent nutritional status in every time of human life. Objectives The main purpose of this study was to identify risk factors of stunting and major determinants of stunting among children less than five years in Amhara region. Methods A study was cross-sectional research design via using a quantitative research approach. The data were from the secondary data source and obtained from the DHS program dataset, KR, and PR file were used. Quantitative methods of data analysis were used bivariate and multivariate methods of data analysis were used. Result The logistic regression and chi-square test showed that place of residence, partners education, wealth index of household, source of drinking water, household toilet facility, a household has television, maternal education, BMI of mother, sex of a child, age of a child, and birth weight were significant associated with child stunting. Conclusion The prevalence and trends of stunting were a decline in the Amhara region but the prevalence still high as compared to Ethiopian prevalence. Therefore, there should be an integrated socio-demographic approach is important to reduce or to take dealings or measure the problem in the Amhara region.

Arşiv kütüphanesi, arşiv araştırmacılarının gereksinim duyduğu kaynaklara erişimlerini kolaylaştırmak, arşiv iş ve işlemlerinin yürütülmesine katkı sağlamak konusunda büyük öneme sahiptir. Çalışmanın amacı, millî arşivler bünyesinde arşiv kütüphanesinin önemini vurgulamak, kütüphanenin sahip olması gereken nitelik ve hizmetlere ilişkin değerlendirme ve önerilerde bulunmak ve araştırmacıların arşiv fon ve koleksiyonları ile ilgili kaynaklardan oluşan kütüphanenin katkısını irdelemektir. Bu doğrultuda, belgesel tarama ile arşiv ve arşiv kütüphanesi ilişkisinin tarihsel gelişim süreci ortaya çıkarılmış ayrıca dünyada millî arşiv kütüphanesiyle öne çıkan kütüphanelerin işleyiş, koleksiyon yapıları ve hizmetleri incelenmiştir. Etkinliği dolayısıyla öne çıkan koleksiyon özellikleri, hizmet politikaları, kullanıcı profili ve yasal dayanak gereklilikleri tartışılmış, bir arşiv kütüphanesinin kuruluşunda göz önünde bulundurulması gereken temel adımlar ele alınmıştır. Sonuç olarak, millî arşiv kütüphanesi; arşiv araştırmalarının etkinliğini artıran, bilgiye erişimi kolaylaştıran ve millî arşivin uluslararası görünürlüğünü güçlendiren temel bir unsur olarak değerlendirilmektedir. Türkiye’de oluşturulacak etkin bir millî arşiv kütüphanesi, araştırmacıların bilgiye hızlı erişimini sağlayarak akademik üretkenliği destekleyecek ve ulusal belleğin görünürlüğü açısından kalıcı bir değer yaratacaktır.

Las cicatrices de acné son marcas que quedan en nuestra piel como resultado de la lesión producida por el acné. Estas cicatrices pueden variar en función del tipo y gravedad, pudiendo ser desde pequeñas a más profundas depresiones, que afectan a la apariencia y textura de la piel. Existen diferentes tipos de cicatrices de acné. El láser de dióxido de carbono (CO2) es una opción de tratamiento avanzado y es eficaz para mejorar la apariencia de las cicatrices de acné. Este utiliza un láser de alta precisión que emite energía en forma de luz, penetrando en las capas más profundas de la piel, lo que estimula la producción de colágeno y la regeneración celular. Utiliza un proceso de ablación controlado que es capaz de eliminar las capas dañadas de la piel, formando una nueva piel más uniforme y suave. Además, consta de beneficios tales como mejorar la textura y tono de la piel, una estimulación de colágeno y el tratamiento de cicatrices profundas. Siempre y cuando se realice bajo supervisión de un profesional para garantizar su seguridad y eficacia.

Awareness, knowledge, and screening uptake remain low among women in Ogun State. However, awareness of cervical cancer positively influences screening participation. Therefore, extensive awareness campaigns are recommended to improve screening rates and reduce cervical cancer prevalence.

&lt;p&gt;Most common AEs (all-cause) ≥10% overall patients (safety population).&lt;/p&gt;

Background: The integration of traditional food plants like Carica papaya (paw paw) into public health nutrition is hindered by inconsistent phytochemical methods, leading to irreproducible data and stalled implementation. Objective: This study aimed to develop and validate a comprehensive, reproducible laboratory protocol for the extraction, fractionation, and quantitative phytochemical analysis of C. papaya leaves and seeds. Methods: A stepwise protocol was developed, encompassing: botanical authentication and optimal drying, sequential methanol extraction, bioactivity-guided fractionation for alkaloids and flavonoids, qualitative screening, and quantitative spectrophotometric assays for key phytochemical classes. The protocol was applied to leaf and seed samples with yield calculations and statistical validation. Results: Methanol extraction yielded 17.51% from leaves and 11.59% from seeds. Fractionation successfully isolated target compounds, with flavonoid yields (7.05–7.96%) exceeding alkaloid yields (2.65–2.97%). Quantitative analysis revealed a phytochemical profile dominated by saponins (1249.83 mg/g in leaves, 723.65 mg/g in seeds), followed by phenolic compounds and alkaloids. Conclusion: This standardized methodology provides an essential toolkit for generating consistent, chemically defined plant extracts. It ensures reproducibility and comparability, supporting the evidence-based development of C. papaya and similar plants as sustainable nutritional resources in public health initiatives addressing malnutrition and dietary deficiencies.

Urinary Tract Infection (UTI) is one of the most common infections in humans both in the community and hospital settings and is the cause of morbidity and mortality among the populace. The study was conducted to assess the prevalence of Urinary Tract Infection among undergraduate students. The study was carried out at Federal University Ndufu Alike Ikwo, within the period of April, 2016 to June, 2016. Twenty milliliter of clean catch mid stream urine was collected from 390 students (219 females and 171 males) within the age range of 17-40. 0.02ml of each urine sample was inoculated onto different bacteriological media and incubated at 370C for 24 hours. The results indicated that the overall prevalence of urinary tract infection in the area was 62.8%. However, the prevalence rate was significantly higher in females than in males (females: 52.4%; males: 41.8%; P = 0.009), hence the χ2test for trend results showed significant variations (P&lt;0.05) between the female to male ratio variables. The most frequently isolated species was E. coli (49.0%) followed by Klebsiella species (17.1%), Proteus species (13.5%), Staphylococcus aureus (8.2%), and Pseudomonas aeruginosa (7.3%), Enterococcus faecalis (4.9%). Students within ages 21-24 (62.4%) had the highest prevalence while students in 200 level (28.2%) had the highest prevalence rate of Urinary Tract Infections. The isolates were subjected to susceptibility test using the commonly used antibiotics in the University Clinic and the results revealed that Gentamycin was the most effective antibiotic against most isolates followed by Augmentin and Peflacin. In contrast, Septrin, Ampicillin, Ceporex, Streptomycin, Ciprofloxacin, Tarivid and Nalidixic acid were the antibiotics to which most of the isolates developed resistance. There is therefore need to monitor the profile of etiological agents of Urinary Tract Infection and the antimicrobial resistance regularly to keep track of effectiveness of therapeutic agents.

Bu çalışmanın amacı eğitsel oyunlarla desteklenen okuma etkinliklerinin beşinci sınıf öğrencilerinin okuduklarını anlamalarına, okumaya yönelik tutum ve alışkanlıklarına etkisini incelemektir. Bu amaç doğrultusunda araştırmada öncelikle eğitsel oyunlarla desteklenen okuma etkinlikleri deney grubu öğrencilerine uygulanırken kontrol grubunda mevcut ders kitabındaki etkinlikler yapılmıştır. Deneysel işlem tamamlandıktan sonra deney grubu öğrencileriyle görüşmeler yapılarak nicel veriler derinleştirilmeye çalışılmıştır. Çalışma grubu 48 beşinci sınıf öğrencisinden oluşmaktadır. Veriler; Okuduğunu Anlama Başarı Testi, Okumaya Yönelik Tutum ve Alışkanlık Ölçeği ve Yarı Yapılandırılmış Görüşme Formu ile elde edilmiştir. Nicel verilerin analizinde kestirimsel istatistik teknikleri kullanılırken nitel veriler içerik analizi tekniğiyle çözümlenmiştir. Araştırmanın sonunda eğitsel oyunlarla desteklenen okuma etkinliklerinin beşinci sınıf öğrencilerinin okuduklarını anlamalarını geliştirdiği, okumaya yönelik tutum ve alışkanlıklarını olumlu yönde etkilediği anlaşılmıştır. Araştırmadan elde edilen nitel bulgular incelendiğinde ise bu etkinin hangi faktörlerden kaynaklandığını, öğrencilerin hangi oyun türlerinden daha fazla yararlandığını ve uygulamada hangi değişikliklerin yapılması gerektiğini detaylı bir şekilde ortaya koyduğu belirlenmiştir.

Afetler, ani ve uzun süreli etkileriyle sağlık sistemlerini zorlamakta ve özellikle gebeler, lohusalar, yenidoğanlar ve çocuklar gibi kırılgan grupların sağlık hizmetlerine erişimini ciddi biçimde etkilemektedir. Afet yönetimi yalnızca müdahale odaklı bir süreç olmayıp; risk analizi, hazırlık, müdahale ve yeniden iyileştirme evrelerini kapsayan bütüncül bir yaklaşımı gerektirmektedir. Bu süreçte afet farkındalığı ve hazır bulunuşluk, sağlık hizmetlerinin sürekliliği ve olumsuz sağlık sonuçlarının azaltılması açısından temel unsurlar arasında yer almaktadır. Ebelik mesleği, kadın, anne ve çocuk sağlığına yönelik uzmanlığı nedeniyle afet yönetiminin tüm aşamalarında stratejik bir role sahiptir. Ebeler; afet öncesinde risklerin belirlenmesi ve koruyucu hizmetlerin planlanması, afet sırasında güvenli doğum ve acil obstetrik bakımın sürdürülmesi, afet sonrasında ise anne ve bebek sağlığının izlenmesi ile psikososyal desteğin sağlanmasında aktif görev üstlenmektedir. Afet koşullarının gebelik ve doğum sürecini travmatik hâle getirebilmesi, nitelikli ve empatik ebelik bakımının önemini daha da artırmaktadır. Bu doğrultuda, ebelik eğitiminde afet farkındalığı ve hazır bulunuşluğun güçlendirilmesi, maternal ve neonatal sağlık çıktılarının iyileştirilmesi açısından kritik bir gereklilik olarak değerlendirilmektedir

Neutropenia is a major predisposing factor for infection in pediatric patients with hematological malignancies. In Indonesia, data on microbial patterns and antibiotic resistance in this group remain limited, highlighting the need for local data to guide empirical therapy. This study aimed to determine the microbial and antibiotic susceptibility profile of pediatric patients with hematological malignancies. A cross-sectional descriptive study was conducted in the pediatric ward of Dr. Hasan Sadikin General Hospital, Bandung, from April to June 2024. Data were collected retrospectively using total sampling from medical records and registers of patients diagnosed with hematological malignancies (subgroups I and II) between January 2021 and December 2022. Microbial identification and antibiotic susceptibility profiles were performed using an automated colorimetry method. A total of 33 bacterial isolates were identified, with Gram-negative bacteria being the most frequent (75.8%). The predominant isolates were Escherichia coli (39.4%), Klebsiella pneumoniae (15.15%), and Staphylococcus hominis (12.1%). From all isolates, 69.7% were multidrug-resistant organisms (MDROs). About 62.5% of Gram-positive bacteria were methicillin-resistant coagulase-negative Staphylococci (MRCoNS), while 48% and 24% of Gram-negative bacteria were extended-spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL) and carbapenem-resistant, respectively. Gram-positive bacteria showed 100% sensitivity to Linezolid, Tigecycline, and Vancomycin, while Gram-negative bacteria showed the highest sensitivity to Amikacin. Escherichia coli, as the most frequent isolate, showed 100% sensitivity to Tigecycline. In conclusion, Gram-negative bacteria were the predominant organisms, with Escherichia coli being the most common isolate. The antibiotic susceptibility test showed a high proportion of MDROs and decreased susceptibility levels in 2022 compared to 2021.

Background/Objectives: Veterinarians often experience poor mental health, including higher than typical rates of depression and anxiety. Self-dehumanization, which refers to the feeling of being less than human, may reflect an important yet neglected factor in poor veterinarian mental health. Methods: 201 veterinarians completed an online survey consisting of demographic questions, questions regarding their practice settings, and measures of self-dehumanization, depression, anxiety, burnout, and secondary traumatic stress. Results: About 10% of veterinarians reported self-dehumanization. Most veterinarians had clinically significant symptoms of depression and anxiety, as well as moderate levels of burnout and secondary traumatic stress. Burnout and secondary traumatic stress positively predicted anxiety, while burnout, secondary traumatic stress, and self-dehumanization positively predicted depression. Cross-sectional mediation analyses indicated that burnout and secondary traumatic stress both significantly mediated the links between self-dehumanization and anxiety, and self-dehumanization and depression. Conclusions: This study provides new insight into the role of self-dehumanization in the poor mental health of veterinarians, which has implications for the development of preventative measures.

Sınır aşan taşıyıcı annelik yoluyla dünyaya gelen çocukların vatandaşlığının tespiti, devletlerin bu yolla dünyaya gelen çocukların soybağına ilişkin yaklaşımlarındaki farklılıklar ve bu konuda uluslararası düzenlemeler bulunmaması nedeniyle zor olmaktadır. Pek çok hukuk sistemi, Türk hukuku da dahil olmak üzere, çocuğu doğuran kadının anne olduğu (mater semper certa est) kuralını kabul etmektedir. Bu durum, soybağının kurulması ve vatandaşlığın tespiti sırasında problemler yaratmaktadır. Türkiye’de taşıyıcı annelik uygulamalarıyla çocuk sahibi olunması yasaklanmıştır. Bu nedenle, yurt dışında taşıyıcı annelik yoluyla dünyaya gelen çocukların Türk vatandaşlığını ne şekilde kazanabileceği incelenmelidir. Taşıyıcı annelik yoluyla dünyaya gelen bir çocuk, soybağına (jus sanguinis) ya da doğum yerine dayalı olarak vatandaşlık (jus soli) kazanamıyorsa, vatansız kalma riskiyle karşı karşıya kalır. Çocuğun vatansız kalmasının önüne geçilmesi için Türk vatandaşlığını iki hâlde daha kazanması mümkündür. Çocuk müstakbel anne veya baba tarafından evlat edinilirse Türk vatandaşlığını yetkili makam kararı ile kazanabilecektir. Bu da mümkün değilse bu şekilde dünyaya gelen bir çocuğun Türk vatandaşlığını TVK m. 12/1(c) kapsamında, vatandaşlığa alınması zaruri görülenler kapsamında kazanması mümkün olabilecektir. Çocuğun Türk vatandaşlığını kazanması, çocuğun vatandaşlık hakkı ve vatansız kalmasının önlenmesi ilkeleri gözetilerek çocuk merkezli bir yaklaşımla ele alınmalıdır.

Past reviews have found home visiting interventions to be successful at improving caregiver outcomes. Though, no review has looked specifically at the effect of home visiting interventions on caregivers with high vulnerability and complex needs. This review aimed to examine and synthesis the literature on the impact of home visiting programs administered to caregivers with young children, high vulnerability and complex needs by professionals/paraprofessionals. Interdisciplinary databases, reference lists, and the Home Visiting Evidence of Effectiveness database were searched for articles that fit the inclusion criteria. Together searches resulted in a total of 623 articles, 34 of these articles were included in the final review, all from high-income countries. Twenty-five interventions were implemented across the 34 studies. Findings showed that these interventions were effective at improving a range of mental health, parenting, and family violence outcomes in caregivers with high vulnerability and complex needs. However, weighted mean standardized effect sizes ranged from 0.01–0.24 (small effect), with only one (i.e., practical parenting skills) of the five significantly different from 0 (standardized mean difference 0.24; 95% CI: 0.10, 0.38; z = 3.39, p = 0.00) and results favoring the control group. Missing information together with considerable variation in interventions, meant that identifying a clear pattern in treatment components that lead to effective verses non-effective interventions was not possible. Further research is therefore needed to assess the effectiveness of these interventions. Trial registration: The University of York Centre for Reviews and Dissemination (PROSPERO) registration number CRD42023460366.

Steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome (SRNS) is a nephrotic syndrome (NS) which does not respond to high-dose corticosteroid therapy after 4 to 8 weeks. SRNS occurs in approximately 10–20% of childhood idiopathic nephrotic syndrome. SRNS patients are at risk of developing cardiovascular complications due to the long duration of the disease. This retrospective descriptive study investigated left ventricular function in pediatric patients with steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome (SRNS) at Dr. Hasan Sadikin General Hospital, Bandung, Indonesia, from 2018 to 2022. A total of 42 patients aged 1 month to 18 years who underwent transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) were included. Left ventricular function was assessed using ejection fraction (EF) and fractional shortening (FS). Most patients (61.9%) had normal EF and FS values, while 38.1% showed decreased systolic function. The mean EF and FS were 55.8% and 30.2%, respectively, with median values of 59.3% and 31.2%. An important finding in this study is that some children with SRNS exhibited decreased EF and FS values despite having no other identifiable risk factors for ventricular dysfunction, such as congenital heart disease (CHD), rheumatic heart disease (RHD), chronic kidney disease (CKD), or hypertension. This finding sugest that ventricular dysfunction may still occur independently in some cases of SRNS.

Bu makale, Alamut’un 1256 yılında Moğollar tarafından yıkılmasının ardından Nizârî İsmailîliğin geçirdiği yeniden inşa sürecini, özellikle İmamlar etrafında şekillenen dönüşümleri merkeze alarak incelemektedir. Çalışma, tarihsel süreklilik ve değişim bağlamında İmamlık kurumunun işlevini analiz etmekte ve Encüdan dirilişi dönemi olarak adlandırılan sürecin, yalnızca siyasî bir gizlenme dönemi değil; aynı zamanda mezhebin düşünsel, kurumsal ve ritüel temellerinin yeniden yapılandırıldığı bir dönem olduğunu savunmaktadır. Bununla birlikte Nizarî tarihi bakımından oldukça önemli kabul edebileceğimiz Davet hiyerarşisi, Encüdan döneminde belirlenmiştir. Bu sebeple söz konusu hiyerarşik yapılanma biçimine de makalede yer verilecektir. Alamut’un düşüşüyle birlikte merkezi otoriteyi kaybeden Nizârî topluluğu, bir yandan takiyye stratejileriyle hayatta kalmaya çalışırken, diğer yandan İmamlar etrafında yeni bir teolojik çerçeve geliştirmiştir. Bu süreçte Encüdan İmamları, görünürde siyaseten pasif bir pozisyonda olsalar da, cemaatin inanç ve ibadet yapılarının yeniden şekillendirilmesinde merkezi bir rol oynamışlardır. Makale, söz konusu dönemde imamların sadece dini önderlik değil, aynı zamanda kolektif kimliğin inşasında da etkin olduklarını ileri sürmektedir. Bu bağlamda, Encüdan süreci, İsmailîliğin tarihinde bir duraklama değil, bilakis yaratıcı ve dönüştürücü bir dönem olarak değerlendirilmelidir. Çalışma, tarihsel belgeler, İsmailî kaynaklar ve modern literatürden faydalanarak bu yeniden inşa sürecini çok boyutlu bir şekilde ele almakta ve günümüz Nizârî kimliğinin temellerinin bu dönemde atıldığını ortaya koymaktadır.

सनातन कवि रेवा प्रसाद द्विवेदी विरचित उत्तरसीताचरितम् महाकाव्य के विद्याधिगम सर्ग में सीता के पुत्रों लव और कुश को गुरु वाल्मीकि के आश्रम में शिक्षा के लिए भेजने की कथा वर्णित है। इस सर्ग में मातृत्त्व और गुरुत्त्व का सुंदर चित्रण किया गया है।लव और कुश को वेद, शास्त्र और संगीत आदि की शिक्षा दी जाती है, जिससे वे विद्याध्ययन में निपुण हो जाते हैं। गुरु वाल्मीकि के निर्देशन में उनकी शिक्षा-दीक्षा होती है, जिससे वे अपने पिता राम के योग्य पुत्र सिद्ध होते हैं।इस सर्ग के माध्यम से कवि ने शिक्षक व शिक्षार्थी के गुणों तथा शिक्षालय के स्वरूप के साथ ही शिक्षा के महत्त्व और माता-पिता एवं गुरु के प्रति श्रद्धा की भावना को उजागर किया है।

Swine farms show greater reproductive efficiency due to improvements in ovulation rate and litter size; however, they require a constant supply of replacement gilts because of the persistently high culling rates (40 to 50%) of sows in the breeding herd. It is recommended that gilts be selected from third-parity litters, with birth weights above 1.2 kg, achieving growth rates of 600 g/day at 140 days of age and 650 to 750 g/day at the time of first service. From 140 days of age onward, stimulation with a mature boar should begin for 15 to 20 minutes in the morning and afternoon to induce puberty between 150 and 180 days of age. Gilts should be first serviced when they reach a body weight of 135 to 150 kg, with at least 13 mm of backfat thickness (BFT), generally at the second or third estrus, around 210 to 240 days of age. Servicing gilts at a body weight between 135 and 150 kg allows them to reach approximately 180 kg at first farrowing and to have a short weaning-to-estrus interval (WEI) of 3 to 6 days, with sufficient body reserves (15–18 mm BFT) to achieve a high ovulation rate, sustain pregnancy, and produce a large litter at the second farrowing. Gilts that are too old (&gt;250 days) and overweight at first service are at increased risk of premature culling. Premature culling is mainly due to reproductive failures and locomotor problems, although an increase in mortality rate has also been recently reported. Sows with extended reproductive longevity are often characterized by producing large litters in their first two parities. To determine the economically optimal parity at culling, the cumulative number of piglets born and weaned during the sow’s productive life in the breeding herd and the future productive potential of a replacement gilt should be considered. For a gilt to be economically profitable, she needs to achieve three to four parities, with at least 12 piglets weaned per litter.

Gebelik, anne ve fetüs sağlığını etkileyen biyolojik, psikolojik ve sosyal boyutlarıyla halk sağlığı açısından kritik bir yaşam dönemidir. Gebelik sürecinde sunulan sağlık hizmetlerinin niteliği, maternal ve perinatal morbidite ve mortalite oranlarını doğrudan etkilemektedir. Bu kitap bölümünde, gebelerde sağlığın korunması ve geliştirilmesi halk sağlığı perspektifinden ele alınmış; koruyucu yaklaşımlar, sağlığı geliştirme stratejileri ve bu süreçleri etkileyen temel belirleyiciler güncel literatür ışığında değerlendirilmiştir. Bölümde öncelikle gebelikte halk sağlığı yaklaşımı ve sağlığın korunması kavramı ele alınmış; birincil, ikincil ve üçüncül korunma düzeyleri kapsamında koruyucu sağlık hizmetlerinin önemi vurgulanmıştır. Düzenli prenatal izlem, aşılama, tarama testleri ve eğitim–danışmanlık hizmetlerinin, risklerin erken belirlenmesi ve yönetilmesinde kritik rol oynadığı belirtilmiştir. Ayrıca psikososyal risklerin gebelik sonuçları üzerindeki etkisi ele alınarak, koruyucu hizmetlerin yalnızca biyomedikal değil, bütüncül bir yaklaşımla sunulması gerektiği vurgulanmıştır. Gebelikte sağlığın geliştirilmesi, kadınların sağlıkla ilgili karar alma süreçlerine aktif katılımını destekleyen güçlendirme temelli yaklaşımlar çerçevesinde incelenmiştir. Sağlıklı yaşam biçimi davranışları, psikososyal sağlık ve ruhsal iyilik hali, gebelikte sağlığın geliştirilmesinin temel bileşenleri olarak ele alınmıştır. Beslenme, fiziksel aktivite, uyku ve stres yönetimi gibi davranışların yanı sıra sosyal destek, eş katılımı ve psikoeğitim uygulamalarının anne sağlığı üzerindeki olumlu etkileri ortaya konmuştur. Ayrıca gebelikte sağlığın geliştirilmesinin Sürdürülebilir Kalkınma Hedefleri ile ilişkisi vurgulanarak, kadın sağlığının bireysel olduğu kadar toplumsal ve küresel bir öncelik olduğu belirtilmiştir.

Opracowanie zawiera przegląd najistotniejszych orzeczeń Sądu Najwyższego dotyczących przyjęcia bez zgody do szpitala psychiatrycznego w tzw. trybie wnioskowym wraz z ich omówieniem. Szczególnie ważna jest eksponowana przez Sąd Najwyższy funkcja gwarancyjna jaką pełnią te przepisy w stosunku do autonomii osoby chorej psychicznie. W przeglądzie omówiono zakres podmiotowy przyjęcia bez zgody w trybie wnioskowym, a także wszystkich podmioty (organy) uprawnione do złożenia wniosku o przymusową hospitalizację. Niemniej ważne jest stanowisko Sądu Najwyższego dotyczące innych niż choroba psychiczna przesłanek umożliwiających orzeczenie o hospitalizacji bez zgody (autor proponuje określenie ich jako przesłanki behawioralne przyjęcia). Wspomniano również o projekcie rządowym zmian przepisów ustawy o ochronie zdrowia psychicznego, które w omawianym zakresie – zdaniem autora – zdecydowanie osłabiają ich funkcję gwarancyjną.

In fibrotic hypersensitivity pneumonitis, the relevance of bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) lymphocytosis remains unclear. We investigated the relationship between BAL %lymphocytes, baseline pulmonary function tests (PFTs) and transplant-free survival. We retrospectively analysed 162 treatment-naïve patients (median age 64 years; 43 % male; 39 % ever-smokers) undergoing BAL within three months of PFTs. Mean FVC 79 %, DLCO 43 %, composite physiologic index (CPI) 48. Median BAL lymphocytes were 24 %(IQR 21-28). BAL %lymphocytes were associated with less severe disease, FVC [coefficient 0.28 (95 %C.I. 0.06-0.48), p = 0.01], FEV<sub>1</sub> [0.20(0.0002-0.41), p = 0.05], and CPI [-0.11(-0.21 to -0.01, p = 0.04]. Although BAL% lymphocytes were not correlated with DLCO, significant opposite correlations were observed for its two components: positive with VA% [0.32 (0.18-0.45), p < 0.0005]; negative with KCO% [-0.37(-0.51 to -0.23), p < 0.0005]. In adjusted Cox regression models, BAL %lymphocytes, lower CPI, higher %FVC, %FEV<sub>1</sub> and %DLCO were significantly associated with increased survival. These findings suggest BAL lymphocytosis reflects a pathophysiological pattern linked to better outcomes.

&lt;p&gt;scRNA-seq data from a single patient with tumor biopsy prior to and after dazostinag and pembrolizumab administration following RT. &lt;b&gt;A,&lt;/b&gt; UMAP of lymphocytes colored by cell type (left) and sampling time (right). &lt;b&gt;B,&lt;/b&gt; Cell type ratio to total lymphocytes in screen and C1D15 samples, with NK and NKT-like cells highlighted in dashed box. &lt;b&gt;C,&lt;/b&gt; Hallmark GSEA of upregulated genes in lymphocytes comparing C1D15 with screen samples. &lt;b&gt;D,&lt;/b&gt; UMAP of myeloid cells colored based on sampling time (left), and Hallmark GSEA of upregulated genes in myeloid cells comparing C1D15 with screen samples (right). CD, cluster of differentiation; KRAS, Kirsten rat sarcoma virus; mTORC1, mTOR complex 1; NA, not applicable; STAT, signal transducer and activator of transcription; Treg, regulatory T cell.&lt;/p&gt;

<title>Abstract</title> Background . To assess trends in cardiovascular mortality among people aged 65 years and older in Poland in the period 2000–2022. Methods . Mortality rates for women and men were analysed separately in two groups: early old age (65–74 years) and late old age (75+). The analysis of time trends has been carried out with joinpoint models. The Annual Percentage Change (APC) and the Average Annual Percentage Change (AAPC) and standardized death rates (SDRs) were calculated. Results . In 2000, cardiovascular diseases (CVD) were responsible for 45.6% of deaths in men in early old age (65–74 years) and for 56.2% of deaths in men in late old age (75 years or older). In the female group, these values were 48.4% and 63.3%, respectively. In 2022, the proportion of deaths due to cardiovascular diseases decreased in all groups respectively to 31.7%, 39.7%, 26.6% and 47.4%. SDRs also decreased: from 2069.8 to 1109.4 per 100,000 among men aged 65–74; from 7928.6 to 4326.7 per 100,000 among men 75+. Among women in early and late olde age rates decreased respectively from 1027.3 to 427.3 and from 6452.0 to 3631.1 per 100,000. Conclusions. CVD still represents a significant health risk, particularly in the oldest people.

<title>Abstract</title> This work presents an experimental study to evaluate the thermal runaway (TR) risk of pouch cells with modified current collectors (MCCs), which incorporate polyethylene terephthalate (PET) for mitigating internal short circuits and further preventing TR. Two types of cells, with capacities of 5 Ah and 10 Ah, were adopted and subjected to nail penetration tests. The results showed that the 5 Ah MCC cells exhibited improved safety, with only one out of four undergoing TR, compared to both control cells without MCCs experiencing TR. In contrast, all 10 Ah cells, including those with MCCs, experienced TR, indicating that the MCC's protective benefits may not apply to higher-capacity cells under similar test conditions. Comprehensive post-mortem analyses, including computed tomography (CT) scans, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS), were performed to assess the internal structural and compositional changes. The findings indicate that MCC technology significantly reduces TR risk in lower-capacity cells, while additional safety measures may be requited for the higher-capacity cells . This study highlights the potential of MCC technology to enhance battery safety and underscores the need for further research to address safety challenges in emerging battery technologies.

Los anticoagulantes orales son fármacos cuya función principal es evitar la formación de coágulos sanguíneos. Estos evitan el crecimiento del coágulo, pero no destruyen el ya formado. Su prevención es de vital importancia, ya que la formación en los vasos sanguíneos o corazón puede conllevar problemas como obstrucciones o ataques al corazón. La terapia anticoagulante oral puede llevarse a cabo mediante diferentes fármacos. Cada uno de estos posee diferentes interacciones farmacológicas, y, por tanto, el tratamiento de elección debe ser aquel cuya acción sea más efectiva y cuyos efectos adversos sean menos perjudiciales para el paciente. Actualmente, los fármacos más utilizados son los antagonistas de la vitamina K; actualmente, varias clínicas recomiendan la elección de los anticoagulantes orales de acción directa sobre los antagonistas de la vitamina K. No obstante, la terapia también consta de un tratamiento no farmacológico. La correcta elección y manejo de la alimentación por parte del paciente, y la educación nutricional por parte de la enfermería, son imprescindibles para una adecuada terapia anticoagulante y una mayor calidad de vida.

Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ), originally developed as an antimalarial agent, has been associated with hepatotoxic effects in experimental and clinical settings. Our study was designed to evaluate the effects of this agent on liver toxicity and to understand the protective roles of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), Liver-52 (Liv-52), and their combination. Male Wistar rats (250–280 g) were randomly assigned to five groups (n = 6): healthy control (C), HCQ only (H), ATP plus HCQ (AH), Liv-52 plus HCQ (LH), and ATP–Liv-52 plus HCQ (ALH). ATP (4 mg/kg) was administered intraperitoneally once daily, whereas Liv-52 (20 mg/kg) was administered orally via gavage. One hour later, all groups except C received HCQ (120 mg/kg, orally, twice daily). All treatments were continued for seven consecutive days. At the end of the experiment, serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels were measured, and liver tissues were analyzed for malondialdehyde (MDA), total glutathione (GSH), superoxide dismutase (SOD), and catalase (CAT) activities, along with histopathological evaluation. HCQ administration significantly increased oxidative stress, as evidenced by elevated MDA levels (p &lt; 0.01) and reduced antioxidant parameters, including GSH, SOD, and CAT (p &lt; 0.05), accompanied by prominent histopathological damage. Treatment with ATP or Liv-52 markedly ameliorated these alterations by decreasing MDA and restoring antioxidant markers. The combination treatment was observed to exhibit the most pronounced protective effect; it significantly reduced MDA levels, improved GSH, SOD, and CAT levels more effectively, and produced significant decreases in AST and ALT values (p &lt; 0.05).

Kelime olarak banyo, sıcak ve yunak gibi pek çok anlama gelen hamam, yıkanma kültürünün mekânsal ifadesi olarak antik çağdan günümüze değişim ve gelişim göstererek ulaşmıştır. Türkiye sınırları içerisinde milattan önce farklı uygarlıklara ait hamam kalıntılarına rastlanmakla birlikte antik Roma, Bizans ve Osmanlı dönemlerinde inşa edilen hamamlara ait kalıntılar ve yapılar bulunmaktadır. Osmanlı Dönemi’nde daha çok cami cemaatinin kullanımı ve vakıflara gelir getirmesi amacıyla inşa edilerek sayıca artan hamam yapısı; köprü, sarnıç ve çeşme gibi dönemin diğer önemli su yapılarındandır. Pek çok Anadolu kentinde olduğu gibi Afyon’da da ilçeler ve kent merkezinde Osmanlı Dönemi’ne ait tarihi bir hamam bulunmaktadır. Afyon kent merkezinde tamamı Osmanlı Dönemi’nde inşa edilmiş toplam 6 adet hamam bulunmakta olup bu araştırma bahsi geçen 6 adet hamama ilişkin tipolojik bir değerlendirme çalışmasıdır. Bu hamamlar Milet (Gavur) Hamamı, Dabak Hamam, Yeni Hamam, Kadı Hamamı, İmaret (Gedik Ahmet Paşa) Hamamı ve Alaca Hamam’dır. Mimarlık alanında, tarihsel süreçte inşa edilmiş mimari yapı veya mimari elemanların arşivlenmesini ve envanter çalışmasını yapmayı sağlayan tipoloji yönteminin kullanıldığı bu çalışmada hamamlar; konum, plan şeması, mimari elemanlar ve yapısal elemanlar olarak 4 başlıkla incelenmiştir. Bu başlıklar kendi içinde alt başlıklara ayrılarak tablolar aracılığıyla hamamlara ait mimari özellikler aktarılmıştır. Sonuç olarak ise bu hamamlar değerlendirilmiş, benzerlik ve farklılıkları tespit edilmiş ve literatüre katkı sağlanmıştır.

Diffuse adenomyosis and lesion-attached intrinsic adenomyosis are associated with an increased risk of postpartum hemorrhage. Furthermore, placental attachment to an adenomyosis lesion significantly elevates the risk of preterm delivery in patients with intrinsic disease. These findings underscore the importance of phenotype-specific and placental-site assessment for antenatal risk stratification.

<title>Abstract</title> Background This study evaluated medication utilization in children, adolescents, and adults with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), a chronic psychiatric condition characterized by intrusive thoughts and repetitive behaviors. Although first-line treatments include selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), the heterogeneous biological underpinnings contribute to suboptimal outcomes, with 40–60% of individuals not responding to SSRIs. This complex phenotype often leads to psychotropic polypharmacy, which may be mitigated by incorporating combinatorial pharmacogenomic (PGx) testing into protocol-based care to identify potential gene-drug interactions. Methods A retrospective review was conducted of individuals with OCD aged 8 to 65 years who received either PGx testing or treatment as usual (TAU). Co-primary outcomes were polypharmacy rate and quality of life. Secondary outcomes included length of stay, medication utilization, and OCD and depression severity. Individuals prescribed at least one daily psychotropic medication with a gene-drug interaction were classified as “incongruent” (PGx-I). Individuals without gene-drug interactions for all prescribed psychotropic medications were categorized as “congruent” (PGx-C). Results A total of 363 individuals with OCD were analyzed. Of these 241 received TAU and 122 underwent PGx testing. Within the PGx cohort, 67% were prescribed medications with potential gene-drug interactions at discharge. The polypharmacy rate was 71% in the PGx-I cohort, compared with 35% in the PGx-C cohort. Quality-of-life measures revealed similar levels of improvement in the PGx-C and PGx-I cohorts. Conclusions Psychotropic polypharmacy rates were higher among individuals prescribed at least one medication with a gene-drug interaction, most notably among adults, while all cohorts showed similar improvement. These findings suggest that incorporating combinatorial PGx testing into the medical evaluation particularly where polypharmacy is a concern may help optimize medication selection, while maintaining effectiveness.

Integrating complementary surface and cross sectional cues is central to preoperative assessment of colorectal cancer, but technically challenging because endoscopic images and pelvic CT encode anatomy at different scales. Here we present HydraMamba, a multimodal selective state space framework that fuses endoscopy and CT for joint lesion segmentation, lesion detection, and survival prediction. The model couples a shared state space backbone with two lightweight modules. Across the endoscopic dataset and the CT dataset, HydraMamba achieved state-of-the-art lesion analysis (endoscopy: Dice 0.856, F1 0.918; CT: Dice 0.812, F1 0.888) and delivered calibrated survival modeling on the CT dataset (Harrell's C index 0.832, Uno's C@1y 0.853, integrated Brier score 0.161, calibration slope ≈1.01). By unifying endoscopic and CT information in a single coherent architecture, HydraMamba provides an accurate and well-calibrated foundation for lesion analysis and prognostication in colorectal cancer.

Bu çalışmanın amacı, AISI 1.2738 kalıp çeliğinin dalma erozyonla işlenmesinde voltaj, darbesiz geçen süre (Toff) ve takım ilerleme hızının işlenebilirlik üzerindeki etkilerini belirlemektir. Deneysel çalışmalar, 3³ = 27 koşuldan oluşan tam faktöriyel tasarım yöntemiyle gerçekleştirilmiş ve malzeme işleme hızı (MİH) ile yüzey pürüzlülüğü (Ra) ana performans kriterleri olarak değerlendirilmiştir. Sonuçlar, voltaj artışının MİH değerini 6.29 g/dk’dan 9.13 g/dk’ya yükselttiğini (%45 artış), buna karşılık Ra değerinin 5.19 µm’den 8.88 µm’ye çıkarak yüzey kalitesini olumsuz etkilediğini göstermiştir. Toff süresinin artışı yüzey pürüzlülüğünde yaklaşık %25 iyileşme sağlarken MİH’te %18 azalmaya neden olmuştur. Takım ilerleme hızının 6 mm/sn’den 10 mm/sn’ye çıkarılması, MİH’te %6 artış ve Ra’da %4 iyileşme ile sınırlı bir etki yaratmıştır. Bulgular, voltaj artışına bağlı olarak MİH değerlerinin yüksek seviyelerde doyuma ulaştığını ve optimum işlem koşulunun 2–3 V aralığında elde edildiğini ortaya koymuştur. Bu sonuçlar, AISI 1.2738 çeliğinin DEİ ile işlenebilirliğinde takım ilerleme hızının etkisini sistematik biçimde inceleyen nadir çalışmalardan biri olarak literatüre özgün bir katkı sunmaktadır.

Introduction: The Mediterranean Diet is known for its protective effects against cardiovascular and metabolic diseases. Metabolic syndrome, characterized by multiple health risk factors, is increasingly concerning in older populations. Understanding dietary impacts on metabolic health is key for promoting healthy ageing. Objectives: This feasibility study aimed to explore the relationship between adherence to the Mediterranean Diet and metabolic risk factors in older adults participating in a community exercise program and to evaluate the feasibility of applying validated tools in this setting. Methods: A cross-sectional design was used. Adherence to the Mediterranean Diet was evaluated using the PREDIMED questionnaire, while Metabolic Syndrome was evaluated according to National Cholesterol Education Program criteria. Blood samples were taken following WHO guidelines. Results: Ten participants (mean age 73.1 years; 90% women) were included. 50% showed high adherence to the Mediterranean Diet, while 40% had moderate or low adherence. No participants met the full criteria for Metabolic Syndrome. Significant associations were found between Mediterranean Diet adherence and chronic disease (r = 0.869, p &lt; 0.01), and an inverse correlation with the number of Metabolic Syndrome criteria (r = –0.707, p &lt; 0.05). The Mediterranean Diet score was also inversely related to cholesterol (r = –0.740, p &lt; 0.05). Conclusions: Higher adherence to the Mediterranean Diet was associated with better metabolic profiles, highlighting its potential protective role. The study demonstrates the feasibility of incorporating nutritional screening in community exercise programs for older adults. Future research should include larger and longitudinal samples and integrate inflammatory biomarkers.

Kuku adalah struktur keratin yang berperan melindungi ujung jari, mendukung gerakan motorik halus, dan mencerminkan kondisi kesehatan tubuh. Berbagai kelainan kuku tidak hanya berdampak pada estetika, tetapi juga dapat menjadi tanda adanya penyakit kulit, infeksi, gangguan metabolik, atau kelainan sistemik. Studi ini merupakan literature review yang disusun melalui analisis sumber ilmiah dari PubMed, ScienceDirect, dan Google Scholar mengenai anatomi, fungsi, dan berbagai gangguan pada kuku. Hasil telaah menunjukkan bahwa kelainan infeksi seperti onikomikosis dan paronikia akut umumnya disebabkan oleh mikroorganisme dan dapat menimbulkan nyeri, perubahan bentuk, serta infeksi jaringan sekitarnya, sedangkan kelainan non-infeksi seperti psoriasis kuku, liken planus, dan paronikia kronis berkaitan dengan proses inflamasi atau iritasi jangka panjang. Kesimpulannya, kelainan kuku bersifat multifaktorial sehingga memerlukan diagnosis komprehensif, dan terapi harus disesuaikan dengan penyebab dasarnya untuk mencegah perburukan dan meningkatkan kualitas hidup pasien.

This report highlights an exceptionally rare case of the dirofilariasis presenting with eosinophilic pleural effusion. A previously healthy 44-year-old male presented with a 1-month history of chest pain and cough. Chest computed tomography imaging revealed the right-sided pleural effusion, along with thickening of the parietal pleura. Thoracentesis was performed, yielding an eosinophilic effusion. Bronchoscopy was unremarkable, and microbiological cultures showed no significant findings. A uniporter video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery was conducted, during that a pathological lesion on the parietal pleura was identified and excised in its entirety. Histological analysis of the tissue confirmed an infection caused by the parasitic organism Dirofilaria spp. As complete surgical excision of the parasite is typically curative; no further treatment was necessary. The patient remained asymptomatic during the follow-up period. This case highlights the necessity of considering uncommon etiologist in the differential diagnosis of eosinophilic pleural effusion, especially in patients presenting with persistent or atypical clinical features.

Amaç: Bu çalışmanın amacı, Malatya ilinin farklı bölgelerinden elde edilen sekiz bal örneğinin standart bakteri izolatları ile Leishmania infantum promastigotları üzerindeki antimikrobiyal etkilerinin mikrodilüsyon yöntemiyle değerlendirilmesidir. Materyal ve Metot: Bal örnekleri aseptik koşullarda toplanmış ve %50–%0,78 (v/v) konsantrasyon aralığında test edilmiştir. Antibakteriyel aktivite için 13 adet ATCC standart bakteri izolatı, antiparaziter etki için Leishmania infantum promastigotları kullanılmıştır. Bakteriyel süspansiyonlar McFarland 0,5 standardına göre hazırlanmış, parazit kültürleri ise RPMI-1640 ortamında 26 °C’de üretilmiştir. Minimal inhibitör konsantrasyon (MİK) değerleri görsel bulanıklık değerlendirmesi ile belirlenmiştir. Kalite kontrol için Amikasin ve Amfoterisin B kullanılmıştır. Bulgular: Bazı bal örnekleri yalnızca %50 (v/v) gibi yüksek konsantrasyonlarda sınırlı antibakteriyel etki göstermiştir. Escherichia coli, Shigella flexneri, Enterococcus faecalis ve Streptococcus agalactiae suşlarında birkaç bal örneği yüksek konsantrasyonda etki göstermiş, diğer tüm bakteri izolatlarında antimikrobiyal aktivite gözlenmemiştir. Leishmania infantum promastigotları için bazı bal örnekleri yüksek konsantrasyonda leishmanisidal aktivite göstermiştir. Daha düşük konsantrasyonlarda antibakteriyel veya antiparaziter etki tespit edilememiştir. Sonuç: Bal örnekleri sınırlı düzeyde antimikrobiyal aktivite göstermiştir. Bu durumun balın kimyasal bileşimi ile Malatya bölgesinde deprem sonrası ortaya çıkan ekolojik değişikliklere bağlı olarak değişmesinin etkili olabileceği düşünülmektedir. Malatya balının antimikrobiyal potansiyelini değerlendirmek için kimyasal içerik analizi ile desteklenen ileri araştırmalara ihtiyaç vardır.

Fraktur femur merupakan cedera tulang yang disertai kerusakan jaringan lunak dan membutuhkan tindakan medis untuk pemulihan. Salah satu komplikasi yang sering terjadi setelah operasi adalah gangguan mobilitas fisik. Penelitian ini bertujuan menganalisis asuhan keperawatan pasien post-ORIF fraktur femur kanan dengan gangguan mobilitas fisik serta menilai efektivitas terapi Range of Motion (ROM) pasif dalam meningkatkan kemampuan gerak. Penelitian dilakukan di RSUD dr. R. Goeteng Taroenadibrata Purbalingga pada seorang pasien berusia 32 tahun menggunakan metode studi kasus yang mencakup pengkajian, diagnosis, perencanaan, implementasi, dan evaluasi keperawatan. Intervensi berupa latihan ROM pasif diberikan untuk memperluas rentang gerak sendi, memperkuat otot, dan mengurangi nyeri. Hasil menunjukkan adanya peningkatan kekuatan otot dan rentang gerak setelah dua hari terapi. Meskipun mobilitas belum pulih sepenuhnya, latihan ROM pasif terbukti efektif dalam mengurangi nyeri dan memperbaiki fungsi gerak. Disarankan latihan dilanjutkan secara mandiri setelah pasien pulang guna mencegah kekakuan sendi dan meningkatkan kualitas hidup.

Background and Clinical Significance: Synchronous gastrointestinal tumors are exceptionally rare, particularly when combining histologically distinct benign and malignant components. Schwannomas represent uncommon mesenchymal tumors of the gastrointestinal tract, most frequently arising in the stomach, while rectal localization is exceedingly unusual. Papillary adenocarcinoma of the gallbladder is an aggressive malignant entity derived from intracholecystic papillary–tubular neoplasms (ICPNs). The coexistence of these two unrelated neoplasms has not been previously reported, making this case of dual tumor pathogenesis clinically and academically significant. Case Presentation: A 68-year-old female was admitted for surgical management of grade IV uterovaginal prolapse. Preoperative imaging incidentally revealed a well-circumscribed rectal wall mass and gallstones. A combined abdominopelvic operation was performed, including total hysterectomy with bilateral adnexectomy (Wiart procedure), rectosigmoid resection with colorectal anastomosis, and bipolar cholecystectomy. Intraoperatively, a firm intramural rectal lesion and a friable papillary mass in the gallbladder fundus were identified. Histopathologic examination confirmed a benign rectal schwannoma (S-100 positive, CD117/DOG-1 negative) and a papillary adenocarcinoma of the gallbladder, pT3N0M0, with clear resection margins and no lymphovascular or perineural invasion. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient remained disease-free at six-month follow-up. Conclusions: This case represents an exceedingly rare benign–malignant synchronous tumor association. The simultaneous occurrence of rectal schwannoma and gallbladder papillary adenocarcinoma underscores the importance of thorough intraoperative exploration and histopathologic evaluation. Complete resection with negative margins and multidisciplinary follow-up remains crucial for optimal outcomes and contributes to understanding dual tumor pathogenesis within the gastrointestinal tract.

Este estudio se centra en la creciente relevancia de las metodologías activas en la educación, especialmente en la formación de profesionales de la salud, con el objetivo de evaluar el impacto de las metodologías activas de los estudiantes de la Carrera Enfermería en la Universidad Estatal del Sur de Manabí. La metodología empleada fue de tipo cuantitativa, con un diseño no experimental y descriptivo, con una muestra representativa de 164 mediante un método no probabilístico, se empleó un cuestionario validado de 31 ítems que abarcó dimensiones como metodología, atmósfera de aprendizaje, autorregulación y evaluación, aplicando una escala Likert para medir las respuestas. Los resultados mostraron un notable incremento de la motivación y el interés por las asignaturas, respectivamente, manifestando estar de acuerdo con estos aspectos, sumado a ello, la participación activa en clase también se destacó, al igual que el pensamiento crítico, aunque se evidencia mejoras en la comunicación, finalmente, se reconoce una mejora en sus calificaciones. Se concluye que, el estudio evidencia que las metodologías activas no solo mejoran la motivación y el interés de los estudiantes, sino que también contribuyen significativamente al desarrollo de habilidades clave y al rendimiento académico. Palabras clave: metodologías activas, aprendizaje, motivación, enfermería, rendimiento académico.

Purpose: This study aimed to identify the influence of nursing professionalism, the nursing work environment, and compassion competence on person-centered care among nurses working in comprehensive nursing care units. Methods: An online survey using structured self-report questionnaires was administered to 190 nurses in comprehensive nursing care units at three tertiary general hospitals. The collected data were analyzed using descriptive statistics, the independent t-test, the Mann-Whitney U-test, one-way analysis of variance, Pearson’s correlation coefficient, and multiple linear regression using SPSS version 29.0 program. Results: The average score for person-centered care was 3.70±0.49, nursing professionalism was 3.56±0.51, the nursing work environment was 2.53±0.46, and compassion competence was 4.01±0.47. Person-centered care demonstrated significant positive correlations with nursing professionalism (r=.636, p&lt;.001), the nursing work environment (r=.542, p&lt;.001), and compassion competence (r=.743, p&lt;.001). Factors influencing person-centered care included compassion competence (β=.56, p&lt;.001), nursing professionalism (β=.21, p&lt;.001), and the nursing work environment (β=.20, p&lt;.001), with an explanatory power of 65.2% (F=118.84, p&lt;.001). Conclusion: To improve person-centered care among nurses in comprehensive nursing care units, it is necessary to strengthen nurses’ compassion competence and professionalism, as well as enhance the nursing work environment. The findings of this study may be used as foundational evidence for developing programs to promote person-centered care in comprehensive nursing care units.

O câncer de cavidade oral é o sexto tumor mais comum em todo o mundo, sendo considerado um problema de saúde pública. O consumo de álcool e tabaco tem sido apontado como um dos principais fatores de risco. O presente trabalho tem por objetivo analisar as características clínicas e epidemiológicas do câncer de cavidade oral no Brasil entre 2013 e 2022. Trata-se de um estudo descritivo e retrospectivo que analisou os casos registados no Sistema de Informações de Registros Hospitalares de Câncer. Foram analisados 55.583 casos de câncer de cavidade oral. A maioria dos pacientes era do sexo masculino (73.9%), com idade superior a 55 anos (45.8%), raça/cor parda (32.4%) e ensino fundamental incompleto (38.4%). O sítio mais acometido foi a língua (13.9%), com estadiamento IV (53.8%). A cirurgia foi o tratamento mais realizado (25.7%). A maioria dos pacientes fazia uso de tabaco (26.2%) e álcool (19.5%). Conclui-se que a maioria dos registros foi de homens com idade superior a 55 anos e de raça/cor parda. A língua, em estágio avançado, foi o sítio mais acometido. Verifica-se a necessidade de reformulação de políticas públicas para promover o diagnóstico precoce.

Background: Elevated intraspinal pressure (ISP) driven by cord swelling is hypothesized to cause secondary injuries following trauma. We previously observed comparable ISP elevations in pigs undergoing traumatic spinal cord injury (TSCI) and sham operations (standalone laminectomy), suggesting the presence of other drivers. Methods: Using a porcine model, we assessed whether ISP elevation was compartment specific, related to cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) restoration, or driven by epidural pressure. In three corresponding sub-studies, the ISP was measured in the spinal cord, subdural, and epidural compartments after TSCI (n=5), and the effects of CSF drainage (n=3) and leaving the surgical wound open were tested (n=6).Results: The spinal cord and subdural ISP increased comparably, validating subdural ISP as a proxy for spinal cord pressure. CSF drainage attempts yielded no fluid and did not affect the subdural ISP. Correspondingly, magnetic resonance imaging revealed that the CSF was displaced by a higher degree of epidural compression than by spinal cord swelling. Leaving the wound open reduced ISP 2.5-fold more than the TSCI itself, further implicating epidural pressure from post-laminectomy swelling as a major driver of elevated ISP. Conclusion: Epidural pressure influences elevated ISP following TSCI and laminectomy, rather than spinal cord swelling alone or CSF reconstitution. These findings suggest caution against external compression after laminectomy and call for further investigation of elevated ISP in patients with TSCI.

Education Mind, Volume 4, No 3

Introduction: Vitamin B12 deficiency may influence cardiac autonomic function and ventricular repolarization. The frontal QRS-T angle is a novel and useful electrocardiographic parameter that reflects the relationship between ventricular depolarisation and repolarisation. The aim of this study was to evaluate the association between serum vitamin B12 levels and the frontal QRS-T angle in asymptomatic individuals. Method: The current retrospective study comprised 92 adults who underwent a standard 12-lead ECG and serum vitamin B12 testing on the same day. Participants were divided into two groups according to their vitamin B12 levels (Group 1 was defined as abnormal having a level of less than 300 pg/mL, while Group 2 was defined as normal having a level of 300 pg/mL or more). The patient's clinical characteristics, laboratory findings and ECG parameters were recorded. The frontal QRS-T angle was calculated automatically using the QRS and T axes provided by the ECG device. Results: The average age of participants was 46.1 (±12.2) years, and 51.9% of participants were female (p &lt; 0.001). Individuals with low vitamin B12 concentrations exhibited a wider frontal QRS-T angle. It was determined that vitamin B12 level is an independent predictive factor for the frontal QRS-T angle. Conclusion: The frontal QRS-T angle may serve as a useful parameter for evaluating electrical changes and susceptibility to ventricular arrhythmias in individuals with vitamin B12 deficiency.

Venous thromboembolism (VTE), including deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE), is a major cause of preventable morbidity and mortality in hospitalized patients. While VTE is well-established in pancreatic malignancy, its association with non-neoplastic pancreatic conditions, particularly acute pancreatitis (AP), is less clearly defined and frequently underrecognized in clinical practice. This narrative review aims to explore and synthesize existing literature on the thromboembolic complications associated with AP, highlighting the underlying pathophysiological mechanisms, clinical implications, and current gaps in prophylactic and therapeutic strategies. We reviewed published studies from major databases up to June 2025, focusing on epidemiological trends, pathological mechanisms related to inflammation-induced thrombosis, and clinical outcomes in patients with AP complicated by VTE. The review discusses pathogenesis, epidemiology, clinical features and diagnostic challenges due to symptom overlap, current pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic management strategies, and the limited but growing real-world evidence on anticoagulation in this setting.

Repeated exposures to Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) and related species may influence host responses, which in turn may affect vaccine efficacy and could even render the host less or more susceptible to progression to active tuberculosis disease. Using well-differentiated primary human bronchial epithelial cells (PBEC), we investigated the effect of a prior exposure of the epithelium to Mtb and M. bovis (BCG) on the intracellular infection efficiency of Mtb and M. avium (Mav) during a second exposure, and measured cytokine and antimicrobial peptide secretion. PBEC that were first exposed to BCG were significantly more resistant to subsequent infection with Mtb. A similar trend was observed in PBEC that were previously exposed to Mtb, although to a lesser magnitude compared to BCG pre-exposure. Furthermore, while the first exposure to mycobacteria induced inflammatory cytokine secretion by PBEC, cytokine secretion was dampened upon a secondary exposure to Mtb, most strongly in previously BCG-exposed cells. Secretion of the antimicrobial peptide hBD-2 was not affected by sequential exposures. In conclusion, repeated exposure of differentiated airway epithelial cells to mycobacteria reduced intracellular infection and inflammation.

ABSTRACT Lane and Sandhu introduced a radiological score to evaluate bone union in animal and human models after experimental bone grafting. We introduce an extension of the Lane and Sandhu Scoring system to serve as a more granular system for robust bone healing assessment in clinical research. We describe the application of this scoring system in the context of an autologous cell‐based osteogenic implant (NVD003) designed to improve the rate of bone union. Images from four participants with congenital pseudoarthrosis of the tibia (CPT) and 9 adults with recurrent osseous non‐union after conventional surgery were obtained. All participants underwent NVD003 implantation. An extended version of the Lane and Sandhu scoring system (eLSS; range from 0 to 12) was employed to assess bone formation, union, and remodeling by two independent readers longitudinally, with final adjudication in cases of &gt; 1 point disagreement. Interobserver agreement was assessed using quadratic weighted kappa. 206 exams (170 radiographs and 36 CT scans) were studied across the two pathologies (81 scans for participants with CPT and 125 scans for participants with recurrent osseous non‐union). Overall agreement between the expert readers was found to be 0.84 (95% CI: 0.79, 0.89), with comparable agreement found per modality (radiographs [0.85] and CT images [0.76]) and per pathology (CPT [0.83] and recurrent osseous non‐union [0.84]). These results support that the eLSS has sufficient reliability to warrant further consideration for clinical trial use. Additional studies with a greater number of subjects, raters, and variety of use cases are required to validate and optimize this method. Level of Evidence: III

Objective: To compare the outcomes of clozapine treatment in early initiators vs late initiators in patients with treatment-resistant schizophrenia Study Design: Quasi-experimental study Place and Duration of Study: Departments of Psychiatry Combined Military Hospital Peshawar and Combined Military Hospital Nowshera, Pakistan, from Jan 2023 to Mar 2024. Methodology: The study included 103 patients with treatment-resistant schizophrenia, diagnosed by going over the past history and record, naive to clozapine, categorized into early (Group-A) and late (Group-B) initiators based on whether they started treatment within or after four years of diagnosis. Data was collected using a semi-structured questionnaire and Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) scores, with treatment efficacy evaluated via changes in these scores after three months using an independent t-test. Results: Out of 103 patients 78(75.7%) were male and 25(24.3%) were female. The mean age of the participants was 31.49±9.06 years. Comparison of post-treatment PANSS scores between the two groups indicated a significant difference (p&lt;0.001), suggesting that the timing of clozapine initiation impacts treatment outcomes. Conclusion: Starting clozapine earlier in the course of illness is associated with improvement in symptoms

Globalisasi memunculkan excess mengenai pola perilaku remaja yang berkaitan dengan perilaku penyimpangan seksual, hal tersebut membuat Negara Indonesia menetapkan kondisi darurat kekerasan seksual. Penyebab terjadinya kekerasan seksual disebabkan faktor individu, faktor lingkungan dan sosial, serta faktor enabling berupa hubungan internal keluarga maupun hubungan eksternal keluarga. Berdasarkan data dari Kementerian Pemberdayaan Perempuan dan Perlindungan Anak (PPPA) tahun 2022 kasus kekerasan seksual sebanyak 11,686 korban dimana pelaku kekerasan berasal dari teman ataupun pacar sebanyak 4.558 korban. Tahun 2023 bulan Maret sebanyak 2.109 korban mengalami kekerasan seksual. Tujuan penelitian ini untuk menganalisis preventif kekerasan seksual pada remaja dengan menggunakan metode viomaze di SMP Negeri 1 Karangampel Indramayu. Metode penelitian menggunakan quasi eksperimental dengan rancangan one group pretest-posttest design. Teknik pengambilan sampel dilakukan secara non probability sampling dengan cara purposive sampling dengan kriteria yang telah ditentukan. Hasil penelitian pada 55 siswa/siswi dapat diketahui dari setiap siswa mendapat nilai yang berbeda-beda sebelum (pre test) dan sesudah (pos test). Hasil pre test setiap siswa menunjukkan nilai yang kurang yaitu berkisar 20 – 50 sedangkan hasil post test menunjukkan kenaikan nilai dari setiap siswa yaitu 70 – 90 dan hasil analisis data menggunakan uji wilcoxon diperoleh p value (0,001) &lt; p (0,05), sehingga (H0) ditolak, dan dapat disimpulkan bahwa preventif kekerasan seksual menggunakan metode Viomaze efektif terhadap peningkatan pengetahuan siswa tentang kekerasan seksual. Edukasi pada siswa/siswi sangat penting guna memberikan pengetahuan kekerasaan seksual dengan harapan agar tidak melakukan kekerasan seksual dan terhindar dari kekerasan seksual.

Background: The five-year survival rate of patients with ovarian cancer remains less than 50%, secondary to chemotherapy resistance. Purpose: This study aims to evaluate the effects of itraconazole as a supplementary treatment with paclitaxel and carboplatin on malignancy response and in preventing the initial development of chemoresistance in chemotherapy-naïve patients with advanced ovarian epithelial cancer. Method: This randomized placebo-controlled double-blind study involved 60 chemotherapy-naïve patients with advanced epithelial ovarian malignancy who were randomized into two arms; the placebo and itraconazole groups. The placebo group received six chemotherapy cycles and four inactive capsules, while the itraconazole group received six chemotherapy cycles and 400 mg oral itraconazole for five days per cycle. Results: Following completion of six chemotherapy cycles and when contrasted with the control arm, the itraconazole arm demonstrated statistically significant improvements in tumor response. The objective response rate was 80% in the itraconazole group compared with 47% in the placebo group (p = 0.015), while the disease control rate was 100% versus 80%, respectively (p = 0.023). The median progression-free survival (PFS), defined as the time point at which 50% of patients experienced disease progression or death, was 13.5 months for the overall study population. PFS was evaluated as a fixed-time endpoint at 18 months following completion of chemotherapy for the overall study population. Progression-free survival was significantly improved in the itraconazole group, with 70% of patients remaining progression-free compared with 26.7% in the placebo group (p = 0.001). Also, the itraconazole group produced significant declines in the serum levels of CA-125 (p = 0.005) and p-glycoprotein (p = 0.042) with significant elevation in VEGFR-2 (p = 0.006) as compared to the control group. Itraconazole was safe and its use was associated with a significant improvement in the quality of life (QOL). Conclusions: Itraconazole could represent a promising add-on therapy to enhance tumor response to chemotherapy in patients with ovarian cancer.

Bu makale İsrâ Sûresi 85. âyetteki “ruh” kavramını, tarihî süreçteki yorumlar ışığında analiz etmeyi amaçlamaktadır. Konulu tefsir metodolojisi çerçevesinde, erken dönem, klasik ve modern tefsir kaynakları art süremli (diakronik) bir yaklaşımla incelenerek kavramın anlam evrimi ve yorum çeşitliliği ele alınmıştır. Çalışmada rivayet temelli erken dönem yorumlarından dirayet unsurlarının öne çıktığı klasik döneme ve ilmî verilerle desteklenen modern yaklaşımlara kadar geniş bir literatür taraması yapılmıştır. Müfessirlerin “ruhu” Cebrail (a.s), vahiy, Kur’ân, hayat kaynağı ve ilahî bir sır gibi farklı anlamlarda yorumladıkları tespit edilmiştir. Araştırma ruhun mahiyetine dair kesin bir tanım yapılamayacağını, bu konudaki insan bilgisinin sınırlılığının âyetin vurgusuyla örtüştüğünü ortaya koymuştur. Tarih boyunca tefsir geleneğinde ruhun Allah’ın emriyle var olduğu ve insan idrakinin ötesinde kalan metafizik bir gerçeklik olarak kabul edildiği görülmüştür. Çalışma hem rivayet hem de dirayet unsurlarını temel alarak İsrâ 85. âyetine dair bütüncül bir perspektif sunmayı hedeflemiş, bu bağlamda müfessirlerin metodolojik farklılıklarını ve ortak kanaatlerini sistematik bir şekilde değerlendirmiştir. Sonuç olarak âyette vurgulanan bilgi sınırlılığının, insanı tefekküre yönlendiren hikmetli bir yaklaşım olduğu anlaşılmıştır.

Introduction: Diabetes mellitus is a chronic metabolic disease with a rapidly increasing global prevalence and is commonly associated with peripheral complications, including decreased foot sensitivity. Impaired peripheral circulation in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus increases the risk of foot ulcers and other serious complications. Buerger Allen exercise is a non-pharmacological intervention that may improve peripheral blood flow and foot sensitivity through postural changes and muscle contractions. Therefore, this study aims to examine the effect of Buerger Allen exercise on foot sensitivity in patients with diabetes mellitus. Objective: This study aimed to evaluate the effectiveness of Buerger Allen Exercise in improving foot sensitivity among patients with Diabetes Mellitus at Sejiran Setason Regional Public Hospital, West Bangka, in 2025. Method: The study used a quantitative design with a quasi-experimental method, employing a pretest-posttest control group design with a total sample of 36 participants. The research involved two groups: an intervention group and a control group. Foot sensitivity was measured using the monofilament test before and after the intervention. The Buerger Allen Exercise therapy was carried out for five consecutive days, twice daily in the morning and afternoon. Result: The results showed a significant difference in foot sensitivity levels after the intervention in the treatment group (p-value = 0.00; p &lt; 0.05). This indicates that Buerger Allen Exercise is effective in improving foot sensitivity in Diabetes Mellitus patients. Conclusion: It is recommended that this therapy be included as one of the nursing interventions in the management of Diabetes Mellitus at Sejiran Setason Regional Public Hospital, West Bangka.

Pregnancies in women with prosthetic heart valves have historically been associated with an increased incidence of adverse outcomes for both the mother and fetus. These outcomes include miscarriage, thromboembolism, postpartum hemorrhage (PPH), and prenatal complications such as preterm birth (PTB), small for gestational age (SGA), and congenital anomalies. The design of prosthetic heart valves has continued to improve, with highly thrombogenic ball valves and large-style valves being replaced by newer bioprosthetic types. These advancements have significantly reduced the need for anticoagulant regimens during pregnancy, leading to better outcomes. Consequently, alongside improvements in obstetric and medical care, the prognosis for pregnant women with mechanical heart valves has markedly improved. However, this patient group still faces unique challenges due to the necessity of anticoagulation therapy to prevent valve thrombosis while ensuring the safety of both mother and fetus. Introduction: Pregnancy in women with heart disease continues to be a clinical challenge due to the associated significant morbidity and pregnant women with mechanical heart valves has an increased risk of adverse outcome both maternal and fetal [1, 2]. However, the biomedical advancement in the heart valves raises the question if there is difference between the maternal and fetal outcome in the mechanical valves used: Prosthetic and Bioprosthetic heart valves. Therefore, we conducted a retrospective study to identify the maternal and fetal adverse outcome in women with mechanical heart valves and to compare the incidence of the adverse outcome between Prosthetic and Bioprosthetic heart valves pregnant women. Materials and Methods: A retrospective study was conducted in the Obstetrics and Gynecology Department at Royal Hospital, Oman. All pregnant women with mechanical heart valves who were followed and delivered at Royal Hospital over the past 10 years (January 2010 to December 2020) were included. The collected data included maternal, pregnancy, and fetal details based on the literature review. Data was collected from the Alshifa Electronic Medical Record System, and statistical analysis was performed using SPSS software. Fisher Exact test was used for measuring the statistically significant relationship between Prosthetic, Bioprosthetic and the outcome. Result: A total of 301 patients were included. 61 patients (20.3%) were Primi-gravida whereas (79.7 %) were women with multiple pregnancy. Bioprosthetic valve found in 199 patient (66.1%) of the included patients. (82.4%) 248 patient were with single valve replacement. The most common of replacement valve replacement Rheumatic heart disease by (59.5%). Since majority of the patient were with Bioprosthetic valve, (65.8%) were not on anticoagulation therapy. Regarding maternal outcome: Mortality rate was (2%), whereas other complication including valve thrombosis, PIH were (3%), Miscarriage was found in 21.3% of the cases and was seen more with patient who were on warfarin. The rate of cesarean section was (23%) comparing to spontaneous vaginal delivery (77%). Termination was indicated on 5 patient (1.7%) with variable reasons for terminations including maternal and fetal indications. For the Fetal outcome: 193 (64.1%) term, 15 (5%) preterm, out of which 43 (14.3%) required NICU admission. Perinatal mortality was (1.3%). 53 (17.6%) were Low Birth weight newborn. And 3 cases (1%) with fetal anomalies. Conclusions: Women with heart valve experienced highly risk of adverse outcome then expected in general obstetric population. Women with Bioprosthetic have less adverse outcome. Balancing the risks of thrombosis and bleeding complications during pregnancy is critical for optimal maternal and fetal outcomes. Multidisciplinary pre-pregnancy counselling is important.

Ushbu ish Oʻzbekiston hududidagi qadimiy davlatchilik anʼanalari hamda Qoʻqon xonligining shakllanishi, rivojlanishi va tarixiy oʻrnini oʻrganishga bagʻishlangan. Tadqiqotda Baqtriya, Sugʻd va Xorazm kabi qadimiy davlatlar misolida milliy davlatchilikning ildizlari yoritiladi, sovet davridagi tarixiy talqinlarning milliy tarixga taʼsiri ochib beriladi.

UK MSK physiotherapists recognise the importance of psychosocial assessment, but its application in routine practice remains inconsistent and largely informal. Confidence appears to be more closely related to exposure to psychosocial screening tools than to years of clinical experience. These findings highlight the need for approaches that support consistent psychosocial assessment within routine MSK care.

Objective: Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a chronic inflammatory skin disease with high prevalence in childhood. The limited dermal penetration of current topical therapies highlights the need for more efficient and safer delivery systems. This study aims to develop and evaluate liposomal formulations for pediatric AD treatment using in silico and in vitro methodologies. Material and Methods: : Formulation components were optimized, and various lipid ratios were analyzed through in silico stability and interaction modeling. Selected formulations were then prepared in the laboratory and evaluated through measurements of density, pH, viscosity, surface tension, and electrical conductivity. All analyses were performed in triplicate using calibrated instruments. The formulation was designed to minimize irritation and comply with clean-label principles. Results: The developed liposomal formulations demonstrated stable physical characteristics, acceptable viscosity properties, and an optimal pH profile. The liposomal structure exhibited strong potential for enhancing dermal penetration of active compounds while reducing irritation risk. A strong consistency was observed between theoretical predictions and experimental findings. Conclusions: This study demonstrates that liposomal formulations present an effective and safe alternative for the management of atopic dermatitis, particularly in pediatric patients. Their ability to enhance dermal penetration and reduce adverse effects suggests promising applicability in future nanopharmaceutical strategies. The environmentally conscious and clean-content design further supports their potential in modern dermatological therapeutics.

Bu araştırmada, Muş yöresine ait taşla oynanan geleneksel çocuk oyunu Moza (Cız) oyununun araştırılıp kayıt altına alınması ve varsa literatürdekinden farklı oynanışının tespit edilmesi amaçlanmıştır. Araştırmada nitel araştırma yöntemlerinden alan araştırması kullanılmıştır. Veri toplama aracı olarak araştırmacı tarafından geliştirilen yarı yapılandırılmış görüşme formu kullanılmıştır. Bulgular, Muş ilinde yaşayan, Moza (Cız) oyununu bilen ve bu oyunu oynayan kaynaklarla telefonla yapılan birebir görüşmeler sonucunda elde edilmiştir. Elde edilen bulgular sonucunda Moza (Cız) oyununa nasıl başlandığı, oyunun nasıl oynandığı, oyunun kimden öğrenildiği ve oyunda kullanılan malzemelerin ne olduğu kayıt altına alınmıştır.

Menstruasi pertama kali muncul pada masa remaja yaitu di usia 11-13 tahun. Pada masa ini pendidikan dini mengenai kebersihan diri saat menstruasi merupakan salah satu aspek penting dan menjadi langkah awal pada upaya peningkatan pengetahuan remaja mengenai kesehatan organ reproduksi. Rendahnya pengetahuan tentang kesehatan reproduksi akan menimbulkan perilaku personal hygiene yang buruk pada perempuan saat menstruasi, hal ini dapat membahayakan kesehatan reproduksinya sendiri. Dalam hal ini, tingkat pengetahuan remaja terkait personal hygiene berpengaruh terhadap perilaku personal hygiene saat menstruasi. Tujuan pada penelitian ini adalah untuk mengetahui hubungan pengetahuan dengan perilaku personal hygiene saat menstruasi pada siswi Jenis penelitian ini adalah analitik dengan desain cross-sectional study. Teknik pengambilan sampel dalam penelitian ini adalah random sampling. Sampel pada penelitian ini sebanyak 77 siswi. Analisis data menggunakan uji univariat dan bivariat. Hasil analisis univariat menunjukkan pengetahuan siswi tentang personal hygiene didominasi oleh kategori baik yaitu 78% (60 orang). Perilaku personal hygiene saat menstruasi pada siswi didominasi oleh kategori baik yaitu 64% (49 orang). Hasil analisis bivariat menggunakan uji statistik chi-square didapatkan nilai p-value pengetahuan dengan perilaku personal hygiene saat menstruasi didapatkan nilai p-value = 0,017 &lt; 0,05 artinya terdapat hubungan yang signifikan antara pengetahuan dengan perilaku personal hygiene saat menstruasi pada siswi MTsN 4 Banda Aceh.

This study investigates the utilization of antenatal care (ANC) services among Tamang women in Helambu Rural Municipality, Sindhupalchok District, Nepal. Using a descriptive and quantitative research design, data were collected from 168 married women aged 15–49 years who had at least one child under five years of age through structured interviews. Main purpose of this study is to identify the antenatal care situation as well as to examine the relationship between educational status and antenatal care services of Tamang women. Findings revealed that 85.1% of respondents received ANC services during pregnancy, while 14.9% did not. The majority (53.8%) obtained services from government hospitals, and 68.5% were assisted by doctors or nurses. However, only 16.1% of women met the World Health Organization’s recommended four or more ANC visits. Educational status of both women and their husbands significantly influenced ANC utilization, with higher education levels associated with greater use of antenatal care services. Economic hardship (48%) and lack of awareness (40%) were major barriers to service uptake. The study concludes that enhancing health education, addressing socio-economic barriers, and improving accessibility to maternal care facilities are vital to increase ANC utilization among the Tamang community

The postpartum period is the most critical period in the life of mother and baby. Complaints that often arise in mothers with postpartum anxiety are feeling anxious, worried about her the condition and the baby, having sleep disorders, concentration disorders, feeling afraid of being alone. Postpartum maternal anxiety is measured using the DASS questionnaire sheet. Management that can be done to overcome this is by providing Lavender Aromatherapy. This research design is Pre-Experimental through One Group Pretest-Postest Design. The number of samples is 30 postpartum mothers with Non-Probability Sampling sampling technique, Purposive Sampling type. Data were analyzed using the Wilcoxon test to determine the difference in anxiety levels before and after being given lavender aromatherapy. Description of postpartum maternal anxiety before being given lavender aromatherapy at Bhayangkara Hospital, namely from a total of 30 respondents, most of the respondents before being given Lavender aromatherapy experienced moderate anxiety, namely 28 respondents (93.3%). The average level of maternal anxiety was 11.37. After the intervention, most of the respondents, namely 23 people (76.7%), were in the mild anxiety category. The average level of anxiety after the intervention was 8.53. Based on the results of the Wilcoxon calculation, a p value of 0.000 &lt;0.05 was obtained, meaning that there is an effect of Lavender Aromatherapy on the level of anxiety in postpartum mothers at Bhayangkara Hospital, Denpasar. Health workers, especially midwives, can begin to integrate aromatherapy into postnatal care practices as a safe, inexpensive, and easy-to-apply supporting intervention.

Devletlerarası sınır ilişkileri ve sınır belirleme faaliyetleri Osmanlı diplomasisinin önemli uygulama alanlarından birini oluşturmaktadır. Nitekim tarihsel süreçte pek çok devletle münasebette bulunan Osmanlı Devleti’nin sınırları sürekli bir değişim geçirmiştir. XVIII. yüzyıla kadar sürekli büyüme ve genişleme yönünde değişen Osmanlı sınırları, 1699 Karlofça Antlaşması’yla ilk kez küçülme/daralma yönünde bir sürece geçmiştir. Makalede Karlofça Antlaşması’nda Osmanlı Devleti’nin kaybettiği topraklarda Venedik Cumhuriyeti ile yaşanan sınır tespit faaliyetlerinin ayrıntıları üzerinde durulmuştur. Çalışma mevcut literatürden farklı olarak taraflar arasındaki kara sınırlarından ziyade deniz sınırlarının tespit ve tahdidine yönelik uygulamaları analiz etmektedir. Bu kapsamda temel amaç, Osmanlı Devleti’nin tarihsel süreçte sınır belirleme faaliyetlerinde kullandığı temel yöntemlerin Karlofça Antlaşması’nda Osmanlı-Venedik deniz sınırlarının tespitinde nasıl kullanıldığının ortaya çıkartılmasıdır. Ayrıca çalışma ilgili sınır tespit faaliyetleri sonrasında taraflar arasında belirlenen yeni deniz sınırlarının nerelerden geçtiği sorusuyla yakından ilgilenmektedir. Makalede bu amaç ve sorular için döneme ait bir hudutname defteri analiz edilmek suretiyle birtakım bulgular elde edilmiştir. Buna göre Karlofça sonrası Osmanlı Devleti ile Venedik Cumhuriyeti arasında belirlenen yeni deniz sınırları her iki tarafın belirlediği sınır komisyonlarının faaliyetleri sonrasında kesinleştirilmiştir.

ABSTRACT Objectives Adult studies reported differences in nasal microbiota composition among patients with allergic rhinitis (AR), nonallergic rhinitis (NAR), and healthy controls (HCs), whereas pediatric data remain limited. This study compared the nasal microbiomes of children with AR, NAR, and HC, investigated factors influencing these microbiomes, and developed a predictive model to differentiate these conditions based on microbiome data. Methods Nasal swab samples were collected from children with AR, NAR, and HC. Microbial characterization was performed using 16S rDNA sequencing to analyze bacterial composition. Relevant demographic data and influencing factors were collected. Results Sixty participants (median age 6.3 [4.3–8.4] years, 51.6% males) were categorized into AR ( n = 24), NAR ( n = 14), and HC ( n = 22). Significant differences in alpha and beta diversity were observed among groups ( p &lt; 0.01 and p &lt; 0.05, respectively). The AR and NAR groups exhibited lower Pielou's evenness than HC (FDR‐adjusted p &lt; 0.01 and p = 0.02, respectively). Compared to HC, the AR group showed a higher abundance of Escherichia‐Shigella , Negativicoccus , and Campylobacter . In contrast, Dolosigranulum was enriched while the Enterobacteriaceae family was depleted in the NAR group. Household pets and breastfeeding duration significantly influenced nasal microbiome diversity regardless of the disease groups. A prediction model of nasal microbial distribution for AR, NAR, and HC identified 14 taxa critical for distinguishing these groups (accuracy of 0.83). Conclusion This pilot study identified preliminary differences in nasal microbiome diversity and composition among children with AR, NAR, and HC. Differential microbial abundances may reflect distinct rhinitis phenotypes. However, these findings are hypothesis‐generating and require validation in larger, independent cohorts.

:

Asian American and Pacific Islander (AAPI) survivors of intimate partner violence (IPV) remain underrepresented in research and service utilization. This study used a sequential mixed-methods design (quant→qual) to examine characteristics of IPV and help-seeking among AAPI women survivors. Quantitative analysis of the National Crime Victimization Survey (AAPI n = 53; total N = 2,447) was compared with qualitative insights from 24 domestic violence advocates. Both data indicated high rates of spousal abuse, repeat victimization, and physical symptoms among AAPI survivors. However, results diverged regarding specific sociodemographic characteristics. While quantitative findings indicated high educational attainment and household income among AAPI survivors, advocates reported financial hardship among survivors served. Findings suggest the need for improved representation of AAPI survivors in research and reaffirm the importance of providing culturally responsive services to prevent repeat victimization and address IPV-related physical symptoms.

Objective This scoping review aims to synthesise the primary literature on the current and emerging clinical applications of venous excess ultrasound, with a particular interest in its use beyond acute and critical care contexts. Introduction Venous excess ultrasound is a novel point-of-care ultrasound tool designed to assess systemic venous congestion. While it has been widely adopted in critical and acute care settings, increasing clinical interest suggests broader diagnostic, prognostic, and therapeutic utility beyond these contexts. Despite this, no comprehensive synthesis has yet mapped the full range of its clinical applications. Inclusion Criteria We will include primary studies involving patients of any age or clinical indication in which venous excess ultrasound has been applied in clinical care. Only studies published in English from 1 January 2020 onward will be considered. Inclusion is limited to studies reporting on the clinical utility of venous excess ultrasound. Non-human studies, abstract-only publications, secondary reviews, and purely technical imaging studies without clinical application will be excluded. Methods Following PRISMA-ScR guidelines, this scoping review will conduct systematic searches of both peer-reviewed and grey literature sources, including PubMed, Scopus, the Cochrane Library, ProQuest, Google Scholar, preprint servers, and clinical trial registries. Where literature sources allow, searches will be limited to studies written in English and published from 1 January 2020 onward. References will be managed and deduplicated using Zotero. Full-text screening and data extraction will be performed independently by two reviewers using Rayyan and standardised Microsoft Excel forms. Disagreements will be resolved through discussion or, if necessary, by a third reviewer. Results will be summarised in tables and narratively.

ABSTRACT Central venous pressure (CVP), a key component of hemodynamic monitoring, is widely used to guide fluid resuscitation in critically ill patients. It is typically measured using central venous line catheterization, which is the gold standard, but this method is invasive, time-consuming, and associated with complications. This study aims to investigate whether machine learning (ML)-based analysis of features extracted from a non-invasive, standard-of-care waveform—the photoplethysmography (PPG) signal—can identify patients with elevated CVP. We trained Light Gradient-Boosting Machine (LightGBM) model using a large perioperative dataset (MLORD), containing 17,327 surgical patients from 2019 to 2022 at UCLA. For this study, we selected 1665 patients with both PPG and CVP waveforms available. A total of 843 PPG features per cardiac cycle (CC) were extracted from the PPG waveforms using a signal processing-based feature extraction tool, along with the simultaneous maximum value calculated from the corresponding CCs in the CVP waveform. Additionally, for each patient, the average and standard deviation of each PPG feature, as well as the mean of the maximum CVP values, were calculated across all cardiac cycles, resulting in 843 averaged PPG features, 843 PPG feature standard deviations, and one averaged maximum CVP value per patient. The average maximum CVP value was used as the ground truth to classify patients as either normal (5 ≤ CVP ≤ 15 mmHg) or elevated (CVP &gt; 15 mmHg). Of the 1,665 patients, 1,182 were normal and 483 were elevated. The dataset was split into 90% for training (1,063 normal and 435 elevated) and 10% for testing (119 normal and 48 elevated). From the 1686 PPG features (843 averaged and 843 standard deviation), 246 were selected for model development using the Recursive Feature Elimination with Cross-Validation (RFECV) approach. To further enhance performance, hyperparameters were tuned through 5-fold cross-validation on the training set. Finally, the best-performing configuration was retrained on the full training data, and its performance was evaluated on the held-out test set. To provide a robust estimate and confidence interval, a bootstrapping procedure with 100 iterations was performed on the test set. The LightGBM classifier achieved a mean area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) of 0.79 (95% CI: 0.71–0.84) and mean accuracy of 0.71 (95% CI: 0.65-0.77), demonstrating good discriminatory power in distinguishing between patients with normal and elevated CVP. This study highlights the ability of PPG-derived features to discriminate between patients with normal and elevated CVP using ML. These early findings lay the groundwork for future research aimed at developing non-invasive approaches to CVP assessment.

Tumor vascular microenvironment (TVME) critically governs biological properties in primary liver cancers (PLC), yet noninvasive tools to decode its heterogeneity remain clinically unavailable. In this study, data from six clinical cohorts encompassing hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC), and combined hepatocellular-cholangiocarcinoma, were comprehensively analyzed. Based on quantitative vascular features extracted from computed tomography (CT) images, a novel multi-task learning computational framework (MTV-Net) was constructed to generate two imaging biomarkers: TAVS<sub>PHE</sub> for classifying PLC based on vascular phenotype similarity to HCC or ICC, and TAVS<sub>RE</sub> for predicting post-resection recurrence risk. Patients classified as "ICC-like" by TAVS<sub>PHE</sub> exhibited significantly worse survival outcomes than "HCC-like" counterparts. Meanwhile, TAVS<sub>RE</sub> effectively stratified recurrence risk across all three PLC subtypes: high-risk groups showed substantially higher recurrence rates compared to low-risk groups (all P < 0.001) and enhanced risk discrimination when integrated with established clinical staging systems. The resulting MTV-Net-Clinic model demonstrated superior prognostic accuracy, with concordance index ranging from 0.731 to 0.823 across validation cohorts. Radiogenomics analysis revealed that enrichment of the extracellular matrix remodeling signaling pathway underlies the shared biological foundation of the two biomarkers. Collectively, MTV-Net serves as a TVME-targeted computational framework, enabling PLC reclassification from routine CT scans and thereby improving prognostic stratification.

ABSTRACT Leading medical organizations have called for advancement of pregnancy‐specific research to reduce harmful evidence gaps. However, meeting this objective poses ethical, legal, and policy dilemmas for investigators, oversight committees, academic institutions, and sponsors. To better understand the extent to which policies may facilitate or hinder the inclusion of pregnant women in research, we conducted two studies: an international study of laws, regulations, and ethical guidelines from a diverse sample of 59 countries and a study of policies from 84 top‐funded US research institutions. We found that most policies use risk‐based criteria for determining whether pregnant women should be included in research. Among countries with inclusion policies for pregnant women, 76% had risk‐based policies (i.e., inclusion is based on risks and benefits to the pregnant woman and/or fetus), 13% had inclusionary policies (i.e., pregnant women should or must be included in research unless there is a valid scientific or ethical reason for exclusion), and 11% had exclusionary policies (i.e., pregnant women should or must be excluded from research unless there is a valid scientific or ethical reason for inclusion). In the US study, 96% of institutions had risk‐based policies, 3% had exclusionary policies, and 1% had inclusionary policies. We also found that many policies referred to pregnant women as vulnerable. To promote fair and responsible inclusion of pregnant women in research, academic institutions, sponsors, and oversight agencies should adopt and implement policies with inclusionary language and refrain from referring to pregnant women as vulnerable.

BACKGROUND Due to the dry and cold climate, the obvious temperature difference between day and night, and the low oxygen content of the air in the plateau area, people are prone to upper respiratory tract diseases, and often the condition is prolonged, and the patients are prone to anxiety and uneasiness, which may be related to the harshness of the plateau environment, somatic discomfort due to the lack of oxygen, anxiety about the disease, and other factors. AIM To investigate the effects of cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) on anxiety, sleep disorders, and hypoxia tolerance in patients with high-altitude respiratory diseases. METHODS A total of 2337 patients with high-altitude-related respiratory diseases treated at our hospital between November 2023 and January 2024 were selected as the study subjects. The subjects’ pre-high-altitude residential altitude was approximately 1700 meters. They were divided into two groups. Both groups were given symptomatic treatment, and the control group implemented conventional nursing intervention, while the research group simultaneously conducted CBT intervention; assessed the degree of health knowledge of the two groups, and applied the Hamilton Anxiety Scale and the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index to assess the anxiety and sleep quality of the patients before and after the intervention, respectively. It also observed the length and efficiency of sleep, and detected the level of serum hypoxia inducible factor-1α, erythropoietin (EPO) and clinical intervention before and after intervention. EPO levels, and investigated satisfaction with the clinical intervention. RESULTS The rate of excellent health knowledge in the intervention group was 93.64%, which was higher than that in the control group (74.23%; P &lt; 0.05). Before the intervention, there was no significant difference in Hamilton Anxiety Scale and Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index scores between the two groups (P &gt; 0.05), and after the intervention, the scores of the study group were significantly lower than those of the control group (P &lt; 0.05). There was no significant difference in sleep duration and sleep efficiency between the groups before the intervention (P &gt; 0.05), and after the intervention, the scores of the study group were significantly larger than those of the control group (P &lt; 0.05). There was no significant difference in serum hypoxia inducible factor-1α and EPO between the two groups before intervention (P &gt; 0.05), and both research groups were significantly lower than the control group after intervention (P &lt; 0.05). According to the questionnaire survey, the intervention satisfaction of the study group was 95.53%, which was higher than that of the control group (80.14%; P &lt; 0.05). CONCLUSION The CBT intervention in the treatment of patients with high-altitude-related respiratory diseases helps improve patients' health knowledge, relieve anxiety, improve sleep quality and hypoxia tolerance, and improve nursing satisfaction.

Quadruple amputation, defined as the loss of all four limbs, is an exceptionally rare condition. Conventional gait training is particularly challenging in this population because the absence of upper limbs limits the ability to grasp assistive devices that are essential for maintaining balance and stability during walking. End-effector robot-assisted gait training offers an alternative rehabilitation strategy that enables upright mobility and task-specific gait training for patients who experience substantial difficulty performing conventional gait training. This approach provides safe, repetitive, and hands-free gait training for individuals with quadruple amputation, resulting in measurable improvements in balance, ground reaction force, and functional mobility. We report two cases of successful amputee gait rehabilitation using an end-effector–type gait robot in two females (aged 72 and 51 years) with quadruple amputation.

III.

Menin inhibitor approval/use is expanding into other <i>HOX-</i>driven subtypes (e.g. <i>NPM1, NUP98r</i>), as a frontline option and in combination settings. Monitoring for differentiation syndrome, QT interval prolongation, recognizing pseudo-progression, and supportive care needs remains essential to maximize patient benefit.

Background: Febrile seizures (FS) are among the most common pediatric emergencies. Zinc, a trace element crucial for neurodevelopment and inhibitory neurotransmission, has been implicated in seizure susceptibility. Zinc deficiency may predispose children to seizures during febrile illness. Data on its frequency in children with FS are limited in our local population. Methods: This cross-sectional study was conducted in the Pediatrics Department, Mardan Medical Complex, over six months. A total of 149 children (3–60 months) presenting with simple FS (generalized seizure &lt;15 minutes, occurring once in 24 hours) were enrolled by non-probability consecutive sampling. Children with prior afebrile seizures, epilepsy, CNS infections, recent zinc therapy, electrolyte disturbances, or focal/complex seizures were excluded. Blood samples collected after initial stabilization of seizure were analyzed for serum zinc by colorimetric method within six hours of collection; zinc deficiency was defined as &lt;70 μg/dL. Demographic, socioeconomic, and seizure-related data were recorded. Frequencies and percentages were calculated, and associations tested using chi-square with p≤0.05 as significant. Results: Mean age was 26 ± 15 months, with 60% males; mean weight was 12.0 ± 4.1 kg. Median seizure duration was 4 minutes. Zinc deficiency was detected in 80 of 149 patients (53.7%). Age, gender, weight, seizure duration, family history of FS, and residence showed no significant association with zinc status. However, zinc deficiency was significantly more frequent in children from lower socioeconomic backgrounds (p=0.03) and with less-educated parents (p=0.04). Conclusions: These findings highlight the potential role of zinc insufficiency in FS pathogenesis. Screening and nutritional interventions may be beneficial, though randomized trials are required to confirm preventive effects of supplementation.

Background: In acute ischemic stroke, reduced oxygen supply may trigger metabolic acidosis and cellular injury. Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), as an intracellular enzyme, helps generate energy by converting pyruvate to lactate in glycolysis. This study aimed to examine the correlation between serum LDH levels and the National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score at the onset of treatment among patients with acute ischemic stroke.Methods: This analytical observational study used cross-sectional design, involving patients with acute ischemic stroke hospitalized at Dr. Soetomo Surabaya Hospital, Indonesia, between February and May 2023. Participants were selected using consecutive sampling. Serum LDH levels and NIHSS score were measured upon admission. The correlation between LDH levels and NIHSS score was analyzed using the Spearman test, with statistical significance set at p&lt;0.05. Results: A total of 30 patients were included, of whom 16 (53.3%) were male. A significant correlation was found between LDH levels and NIHSS scores (p=0.001). The correlation coefficient (r=0.785) indicated a strong positive correlation between serum LDH levels and stroke severity.Conclusions: This study demonstrates a strong positive correlation between LDH levels and NIHSS scores at the onset of acute ischemic stroke treatment. These findings suggest that LDH may serve as a practical early biomarker for assessing stroke severity. Integrating LDH measurement into initial evaluation may facilitate faster risk stratification and support timely clinical decision-making. Further studies with larger sample sizes are needed to validate its prognostic role in routine practice.

Aim: The aim of this study is to evaluate the relationship between paraaortic adipose tissue (PAT) thickness measured by transthoracic echocardiography and left ventricular diastolic function parameters in the young age group. Material and Methods: This cross-sectional study included a total of 254 individuals aged 18–55 who visited the cardiology outpatient clinic. Participants' detailed medical histories were obtained, and body mass index (BMI), body surface area (BSA), and routine biochemical tests were recorded. Ejection fraction, left ventricular mass index, and diastolic function were assessed using transthoracic echocardiography. PAT thickness was defined as a hypoechoic space 2 cm above the sinotubular junction of the ascending aorta and measured in millimetres using echocardiography. The IBM SPSS program was used for statistical analyses, and correlation, univariate, and multivariate regression analyses were performed between parameters. Results: Diastolic dysfunction was detected in 27.1% of participants (n=69). In the diastolic dysfunction group, age (p &lt; 0.001), body mass index (p = 0.005), body surface area (p = 0.043), and PAT thickness (9.09 ± 4.26 mm vs. 6.91 ± 4.57 mm; p = 0.003) were significantly higher. Additionally, left atrial diameter (p = 0.016), aortic diameter (p &lt; 0.001), relative wall thickness (p = 0.003), and left ventricular mass index (p = 0.012) were also significantly increased in this group. In univariate regression analysis, PAT (OR = 1.10; 95% CI: 1.03–1.19; p = 0.003), age (OR = 1.12; 95% CI: 1.05–1.21; p &lt; 0.001), hypertension (OR = 2.78; 95% CI: 1.49–5.17; p = 0.001), BMI (OR = 1.08; 95% CI: 1.02–1.16; p = 0.009), and RDW (OR = 1.15; 95% CI: 1.01–1.31; p = 0.032) were significantly associated with diastolic dysfunction. However, in multivariate analysis, only age remained an independent predictor (p = 0.045; OR = 1.089; 95% CI: 1.002–1.183). In correlation analysis, PAT correlated with age (r = 0.41; p &lt; 0.001), BMI (r = 0.33; p &lt; 0.001), BSA (r = 0.37; p &lt; 0.001), LA diameter (r = 0.34; p = 0.012), RWT (r = 0.33; p = 0.014), and LVMI (r = 0.35; p = 0.009), while a negative correlation was found with the E/A ratio (r = –0.39; p &lt; 0.001). Conclusion: Para-aortic adipose tissue thickness, which can be measured by transthoracic echocardiography, has been found to be associated with diastolic dysfunction in young individuals. However, PAT is not an independent predictor independent of traditional risk factors such as age and obesity. These results suggest that adipose tissue around the aorta may play a role in the pathophysiology of diastolic dysfunction and may be considered a risk marker in the subclinical period.

The circulating levels of glycocalyx degradation products (SDC-1, HS, and HA) were markedly elevated in AECOPD patients and demonstrated significant correlations with the severity of impaired lung function and gas exchange. Analysis revealed that these biomarkers were independent predictors of acute exacerbations and strongly associated with prolonged hospitalization. Therefore, our study provides clinical evidence that quantifying these components offers a promising, non-invasive approach for assessing disease severity and predicting outcomes in COPD.

Fistulas of the prostate and seminal vesicles are rare and hence a poorly understood complication of Crohn's disease (CD), often presenting with non-specific urinary symptoms. We report a case of a 27-year-old male with an 11-year history of poorly managed CD who developed complex trans-organ fistulous tracts. Magnetic resonance images revealed an extensive fistulizing disease and intra-fistulous abscess formation involving the bowel loops, urinary bladder, seminal vesicles, and prostate gland. Several complex types of fistulas, including perianal and intra-abdominal fistulas, have been described in advanced fistulizing CD; however, prostatic involvement is scarcely documented in the literature. This paper highlights the critical role of radiological imaging in accurately detecting and interpreting rare and complex cases to guide effective management.

BMP2-activated macrophage-derived exosomes regulate BMSC osteogenic differentiation through miR-466i-5p and miR-365-2-5p, thereby revealing a novel therapeutic target for exosome-based bone regeneration strategies.

Penelitian ini mengkaji pengaruh terapi mindfulness meditation dengan teknik meditasi rasa syukur terhadap tingkat stres mahasiswa tingkat akhir di Universitas Muhammadiyah Kudus. Desain kuasi-eksperimental dengan kelompok kontrol non-ekivalen melibatkan 96 responden (48 intervensi, 48 kontrol) yang diukur menggunakan DASS-42. Intervensi dilaksanakan selama 4 minggu (2 kali per minggu, 60 menit per sesi). Hasil menunjukkan penurunan signifikan tingkat stres pada kelompok intervensi: 70,8% stres ringan dan 25% tanpa stres setelah terapi, dibandingkan tidak ada perubahan pada kelompok kontrol. Uji Wilcoxon signed rank menunjukkan p-value = 0,000 pada kelompok intervensi, dan uji Mann-Whitney mengkonfirmasi perbedaan signifikan antarkelompok (U = 0,000; p &lt; 0,05). Mindfulness meditation dengan teknik rasa syukur efektif menurunkan stres pada mahasiswa tingkat akhir, memberikan intervensi praktis dan biaya rendah untuk dukungan kesejahteraan mental. Keterbatasan penelitian mencakai ketidakmampuan mengontrol seluruh variabel perancu dan kondisi lingkungan selama intervensi berlangsung.

Araştırmada, karabalık (Clarias gariepinus) larvalarının ilk beslenmesinde, izolösin ile zenginleştirilmiş artemia (test grubu) ve zenginleştirilmemiş artemia (kontrol grubu) kullanılmıştır. Test grupları, İzolösin (İzol)-3, İzol-5, İzol-7 ve İzol-14 gruplarından, kontrol grupları ise Kont-3, Kont-5, Kont-7 ve Kont-14 gruplarından oluşmuştur. İzol-3 ve Kont-3 gruplarında 3. gün, İzol-5 ve Kont-5 gruplarında 5. gün, İzol-7 ve Kont-7 gruplarında ise 7. gün toz yeme geçilmiş ve çalışmanın sonuna kadar toz yemle besleme yapılmıştır. İzol-14 ve Kont-14 gruplarında ise 14 gün sadece canlı yem beslemesi yapılmıştır. Çalışmanın sonunda, canlı yemlerin ve toz yeme geçiş günlerinin karabalık larvalarının büyüme performansları üzerine etkileri ve boy-ağırlık arasındaki ilişkileri değerlendirilmiştir. En yüksek ağırlık ortalamaları Kont-5 (25.41 mg) grubunda, en düşük ise İzol-14 (4.52 mg) grubunda ölçülmüştür (P0,05). Spesifik büyüme (SBO) ve canlı ağırlık kazancı (CAK) bakımından en iyi gelişme Kont-5 ve İzol-3 gruplarında gözlenmiştir. En düşük yaşama oranları (YO) İzol-7 ve İzol-14 gruplarında %44.76 olarak gerçekleşmiştir. Sonuç olarak; en iyi gelişim performansları İzol-3, Kont-3, ve Kont-5. gruplarında gözlenmiştir. Ayrıca, izolösince zenginleştirilmiş artemia ile uzun süreli beslemenin karabalık larvalarında gelişmeyi yavaşlattığı belirlenmiştir.

Objective: To compare the diagnostic accuracy of Methylene blue versus patent blue dyes in the identification of sentinel lymph node (SLN) on biopsy, and compare clinical patient outcomes, including adverse effects and local tissue effects. Study Design: Quasi-Experimental study. Place and Duration of Study: Department of Breast Surgery, Combined Military Hospital, Rawalpindi Pakistan, from Mar to Sep 2025. Methodology: A total 240 were divided to identify sentinel lymph node using Methylene blue (n=120) versus patent blue dyes (n=120). Primary variable studied was the diagnostic accuracy of both dyes in detection of sentinel lymph node compared with the actual histopathology report. Secondary variables studied were incidence and frequency of adverse effects between both groups. Results: Diagnostic comparison of Methylene blue compared to actual histopathology results showed a diagnostic accuracy of 90.0% while comparison of patent blue dye showed a diagnostic accuracy of 95.8%. Frequency of adverse effects showed that hypersensitivity was seen in 05(4.2%) versus 07(5.8%) patients (p=0.769), skin rash was seen in 04(3.3%) versus 08(6.7%) patients, bronchospasm was seen in 00(0%) versus 02(1.7%) patients (p=0.498), confusion was seen in 01(0.8%) versus 03(2.5%) patients (p=0.622), dizziness was seen in 02(1.7%) versus 05(4.2%) patients (p=0.446) and nausea was seen in 02(1.7%) versus 04(3.3%) patients (p=0.684). Conclusion: The study concludes that, combined with the radioisotope, both methods show comparable detection rates for sentinel lymph nodes with a favorable and comparable adverse effects profile.

Hospital-physician vertical integration has become a defining feature of the health care landscape. While some evidence exists regarding integration’s effect on clinical outcomes, little has examined patient-reported experience. We used the 2021 Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey, constructing psychometric scales of care coordination and quality, communication, and accessibility from survey responses. We analyzed how patient experience with each scale differed by the proportion of care received from integrated physicians, adjusting for patients’ characteristics. Integrated care was significantly and positively associated with patients’ perceptions of coordination and quality. This relationship was driven by patients with high clinical complexity, with effects twice as large as for patients with low clinical complexity. However, integrated care was not significantly associated with communication or accessibility. These findings suggest a nuanced relationship between integration and patient experience. Policymakers, who often discuss integration in terms of outcomes and affordability, should also consider ways in which it shapes patients’ experiences.

La calidad de vida en el trabajo (CVT) es un factor determinante en el bienestar y desempeño de los profesionales de salud, con impacto directo en la calidad de la atención y la retención del personal. En Ecuador, existe escasa evidencia sobre la CVT en hospitales públicos, particularmente en el Hospital General IESS Portoviejo. El objetivo de este estudio fue evaluar la CVT de sus profesionales de salud y analizar su relación con variables sociodemográficas y laborales.

Mục tiêu: Mô tả đặc điểm lâm sàng, cận lâm sàng và kết quả sớm phẫu thuật u mô đệm dạ dày tại Bệnh viện Hữu Nghị Việt Đức. Phương pháp nghiên cứu: Nghiên cứu mô tả cắt ngang hồi cứu trên 48 bệnh nhân được chẩn đoán GIST dạ dày và được phẫu thuật cắt u tại Bệnh viện Hữu Nghị Việt Đức từ tháng 01/2019 đến tháng 12/2023. Dữ liệu thu thập hồ sơ từ bệnh án, phân tích bằng phần mềm SPSS 20.0. Kết quả: Độ tuổi trung bình 56,0 ± 15,2. Tỉ lệ nam/nữ là 1,09/1. Triệu chứng thường gặp nhất là đau bụng vùng thượng vị (56,3%), khối u kích thước dao động từ 10 đến 285 mm, chủ yếu là u tế bào hình thoi với 47/48 trường hợp chiếm 97,9%, 22 bệnh nhân (45.8%) được thực hiện bằng phẫu thuật nội soi, 26 bệnh nhân (54,2%) trường hợp được mổ mở, cắt hình chêm là phương án được áp dụng chủ yếu (81,3%), thời gian mổ trung bình là 116,1±54,7 phút, thời gian hậu phẫu trung bình 7,1±2,1 ngày. Kết luận: Phẫu thuật vẫn là phương pháp điều trị chủ yếu cho GIST dạ dày. Chẩn đoán cần kết hợp lâm sàng, hình ảnh học và mô bệnh học. Lựa chọn phương pháp phẫu thuật phụ thuộc vào cơ sở y tế và thói quen phẫu thuật viên.

Patients with diabetes often experience a variety of electrolyte imbalances. These patients have significant disorders deficiencies in phosphate, magnesium, and potassium Both hypo- and hyper-natremia are associated with diabetes mellitus, which is indicative of the coexistence of processes related to hyperglycemia that tend to alter blood sodium in opposite ways. Hyper tonicity, insulin insufficiency, potassium-sparing medications, and impaired renal function are other factors that contribute to the development of hyperkalemia. The electrolyte abnormalities that occur in diabetes mellitus are summarized in this article along with the fundamental mechanism. These strategiesare designed to realization should open the door to pathophysiology directed treatment, which will help prevent the various negative consequences linked to electrolyte imbalances and their management. In people with diabetes, electrolyte imbalances are frequent and may be linked to higher rates of morbidity and death. Those with decompensated diabetes mellitus, the elderly, and those with renal impairment are more likely to have these disruptions. Doctors prescribe complex treatment regimens that work to regulate electrolyte imbalance in diabetics in order to control blood sugar levels. It is best to understand the physiological mechanism of patients suffering from electrolyte imbalance, which plays an important role in controlling sugar levels in diabetics.

ABSTRACT Background Subglottic stenosis (SGS) is a narrowing of the airway below the glottis and may be congenital or acquired. While prolonged intubation is the most common cause of acquired SGS, other etiologies remain incompletely understood. Methods A 37‐year‐old woman presented with a four‐year history of mild progressive stridor, dysphonia, and chronic cough. Her medical history was notable for Graves' disease, treated initially with long‐term carbimazole followed by radioactive iodine (RAI). She had never been intubated and had no autoimmune or rheumatologic disease. Awake fiberoptic endoscopy raised suspicion of SGS, which was confirmed by preoperative magnetic resonance imaging. Results Suspension microlaryngoscopy with biopsy and dilation revealed a Myer‐Cotton grade II SGS with an irregular aspect and exposed cartilage. Histopathology demonstrated chronic inflammation, fibrosis, and reactive epithelial changes consistent with radiation‐induced injury. After a second endoscopic dilation, only a minor anterior synechia remained, without evidence of recurrent stenosis. Conclusions This case report highlights a temporal association between RAI therapy and the subsequent development of SGS, supported by histopathological findings suggestive of radiation‐induced tissue injury. In the absence of other established risk factors, RAI treatment may represent a rare but clinically relevant cause of acquired SGS, a complication not previously reported in the literature.

Traffic police officers represent a critical occupational group with high vulnerability to vehicular air pollution, a severe environmental health threat in rapidly urbanizing metropolises such as Addis Ababa. This cross-sectional study explored occupational exposure, protective practices, health risks, perceptions, and awareness of air-quality-associated health risks among 120 traffic police officers in Addis Ababa. The officers were mostly male (80%) and married (93.3%), with the majority (62.6%) having served for more than ten years. While vehicle emissions were consistently recognized as the main source of air pollution, critical knowledge gaps were identified, i.e., only 24.2% had received pollution-related training, fewer than half (45.8%) were aware of government policies, and just 9.2% reported collaboration with environmental authorities. Awareness of the Air Quality Index (AQI) was generally low, and regular monitoring of AQI was limited. Self-reported health symptoms were highly prevalent among participants, with cough (75.0%), eye irritation (61.7%), sneezing (58.3%), and runny nose (55.8%) being the most frequently reported. Notably, sneezing, runny nose, eye irritation, and psychological stress showed significant association with perceived pollution levels at the workplace (p &lt; 0.05), while blood pressure, cough, difficulty concentrating, and sleep loss were not significantly associated (p &gt; 0.05). A higher prevalence of symptoms was generally observed in groups experiencing moderate-to-very high levels of pollution. Protective measures were applied inconsistently; while 63.3% of participants reported using masks, their beliefs about the effectiveness of using masks varied. Relocation (60%) and use of face covers/glasses (13.3%) were less commonly practiced. Overall, traffic police officers are exposed to occupational air pollution, which is associated with various health symptoms. These findings highlight the need for enhanced training, clearer communication of policies, stronger institutional engagement, the provision of standardized protective masks, and the promotion of AQI utilization to reduce occupational health risks and safeguard the wellbeing of traffic police officers in Addis Ababa.

Introduction: The low awareness and practice of Menstrual Hygiene Management in adolescent girls results in a negative impact on reproductive health. Blended Learning is used as a learning and health education method in the digital revolution era. The purpose of this study is to analyze the effect of menstrual hygiene management with flex model learning and station rotation blended learning on the perception and behavior of personal hygiene during menstruation in adolescent girls. Method: This was a true-experimental study with a randomized pretest-posttest control group design. The sample consisted of two intervention groups and one control group, each with 34 respondents. The sampling method used simple random sampling and a questionnaire as the measuring instrument. The statistical test used a paired sample t-test with an ? value of &lt;0.05. Result And Analysis: There is a significant influence between before and after menstrual hygiene intervention with flex model learning with a correlation value of 0.399 (moderate correlation relationship) and menstrual hygiene management intervention with station blended learning with a correlation value of 0.739 (very strong correlation relationship) on the perception of personal hygiene during menstruation in adolescent girls. There is a significant influence between before and after menstrual hygiene management with flex model learning with a correlation value of 0.559 (strong correlation relationship) and menstrual hygiene management intervention with station blended learning with a correlation value of 0.843 (very strong correlation relationship) on personal hygiene behavior during menstruation in adolescent girls. Conclusion: Health education using the blended learning method is expected to raise awareness and improve Menstrual Hygiene Management practices among adolescent girls.

Objectives: Psoriasis (PsO) is a chronic skin disease, with one-third of cases occurring during childhood. The impact of PsO is not limited to the child but also inevitably extends to the caregiver. The current study aimed to measure quality of life (QoL) of caregivers of children with PsO and its associated factors. Material and Methods: A cross-sectional descriptive study with an analytic component included 165 caregivers of children diagnosed with various types of PsO for at least 6 month’s duration. The severity of PsO was assessed with the Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI) score, and caregivers’ QoL was assessed using the family dermatology life quality index (FDLQI). Mann-Whitney and Kruskal-Wallis tests were used to compare non-normally distributed data. Linear regression was applied to evaluate the contribution of factors found to be significantly correlated with the square root of QoL. Qualitative variables were included in the model as dummy variables. A p-value of ≤0.05 was regarded as statistically significant. Results: Both median and mean QoL scores among studied caregivers were 11 out of 30 (36.7% of total score). Median QoL scores were higher among caregivers with very low and low socioeconomic levels (p &lt; 0.001), caregivers of preschool children (p = 0.04), children with previous hospitalization for PsO, pustular PsO, face, scalp, and genital involvement (p = 0.01, 0.003, 0.02, 0.03, and &lt; 0.001, respectively). Moderate to severe PsO had a higher median QoL score compared to mild PsO (p &lt; 0.001). Linear regression revealed that the independent predictors of impaired QoL among caregivers were socioeconomic status, genital involvement, and severity of PsO. Conclusion: Caregivers of children with PsO experienced a relatively impaired QoL. Many caregiver- and patient-related factors were associated with a low QoL score among caregivers.

Introduction: The importance of Multidisciplinary Teams (MDTs) in modern healthcare delivery is growing rapidly. In terms of MDTs, nurses participate actively in administering, managing and communicating the various levels of supportive care to patients fulfilling their needs. As nurses touch the patient, their contributions to MDTs are essential. Patient satisfaction is one of the key indicators of the healthcare system. Hence, these contributions need to be evaluated. Methodology: A cross-sectional study was conducted to focus on healthcare providers in Karachi, Pakistan. A sample size of 219 was calculated through OpenEpi Software. A convenience sampling technique was used to collect the data by adopting a structured questionnaire. Data analysis was conducted by utilizing SPSS version 26, incorporating descriptive statistics. Ethical approval was taken and informed consent was attained from the participants before data collection. Results: Out of 219 respondents, majority were females. Most of the study participants agreed that nurses coordinate care, facilitate information flow, and provide advocacy. Overall, 75.8% reported greater satisfaction with nursing care. However, staffing shortage and burnout were cited as challenges. Conclusion: Within the MDTs framework, nurses are central to patient satisfaction, and are the primary caregivers providing emotional support, communication, and coordination. However, nurse’s shortages and high workloads inhibit their productivity. Improved organizational support and equipping nurses with teamwork and leadership training are necessary to improve quality and patient-centered care.

La salud pélvica de la mujer ha constituido un aspecto fundamental dentro de la atención primaria en salud. Sin embargo, en ocasiones los profesionales de la salud pueden detectar síntomas como pérdidas de orina, sensación de pesadez, dolor o molestias, que pasan a ser erróneamente atribuidos al envejecimiento o bien, ser subdiagnosticados. En este contexto, el examen uroginecológico constituye una herramienta clave ya que, mediante una anamnesis detallada y la exploración física que incluya la maniobra de Valsalva, inspección perineal y valoración del tono muscular permite detectar precozmente una incontinencia urinaria, incontinencia fecal y/o prolapsos de órganos pélvicos. Por ende, su incorporación en la práctica clínica de los profesionales de matronería, con enfoque integral, favorece la prevención, tratamiento oportuno y empoderamiento de la mujer, contribuyendo a mejorar su calidad de vida.

Abstract Sepsis is a life-threatening condition arising from a dysregulated host response to infection, characterized by a complex interplay between pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory immune mechanisms. B cells, that are key components of humoral immunity, are essential for antibody production, antigen presentation, and immune modulation. Sepsis is commonly associated with B cell lymphopenia, particularly in severe cases, as evidenced by a marked reduction in circulating B cells in both adult and pediatric patients. However, the mechanisms driving this depletion have not been completely understood, particularly in pediatric sepsis. In this study, we employed single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) to profile peripheral blood leukocytes from pediatric patients with sepsis (three with mild and three with severe condition) alongside four healthy controls. Our analysis revealed a broad depletion of immune cells in sepsis, with B cells showing the most pronounced reduction and the strongest capacity to discriminate between mild and severe disease states. Subset-level analysis identified significant loss and transcriptional reprogramming of natural killer-like B cells (ΝΚΒ), MHC II high naïve, and MHC II low naïve B cells in severe sepsis, accompanied by signatures indicative of intrinsic and extrinsic apoptosis, disrupted differentiation, and enhanced migratory potential. Importantly, we identified and validated the population of NKB cells in both pediatric and adult cohorts, broadening the known landscape of B cell phenotypes in human sepsis. We also explored intercellular communications, focusing on B cell-neutrophil interactions, given the notable neutrophilia observed, revealing potential crosstalk that may contribute to the overall immune dysregulation in sepsis. Collectively, these findings offer new insights into the cellular and molecular drivers of immune dysfunction in pediatric sepsis, shedding light on B cell depletion as a central feature of disease severity. This work lays the foundation for future diagnostic and therapeutic strategies targeting B cell-mediated immunity in septic children. The study was registered on ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT04103268), with registration date on 2019-09-23, before the first patient was enrolled.

Feline panleukopenia is a highly transmissible and often fatal viral disease that particularly affects kittens. This study aimed to determine the prevalence of feline panleukopenia virus (FPV) among cats and evaluate associated risk factors. A cross-sectional study was conducted on clinically suspected cases from a selected region of Bangladesh. Data were collected using a structured questionnaire, and FPV infection was confirmed through clinical signs and rapid diagnostic tests. Fisher's exact test was employed for statistical analysis to assess the associations. A total of 1,116 cat cases were retrieved, of which 262 were clinically diagnosed with FPV, resulting in an overall prevalence rate of 23.48%. FPV cases were most commonly observed in young, male, non-immunized Persian cats during the winter season. The highest prevalence was recorded in Persian breeds (30.25%), cats aged 0–6 months (29.46%), males (23.98%), during winter (26.22%), and in non-vaccinated cats (27.97%). These findings indicate a significant burden of FPV in the study area, underscoring the importance of future nationwide surveillance. The study highlights the critical need for targeted vaccination programs, early diagnosis, and preventive measures—particularly for young, non-vaccinated, and high-risk breeds—to reduce FPV incidence and mortality in cats. These findings can inform public health strategies and guide future nationwide surveillance efforts in Bangladesh. Asian J. Med. Biol. Res. 2025, 11(4), 135-142

Yapay zekâ algoritmalarının belirli görevleri yerine getirebilmesi ve karar verme süreçlerini yürütebilmesi için büyük ölçekli veri ve materyal kümeleri eğitilmiş olması gerekir. Kendisinden fikir ve sanat eserleri hukuku kapsamındaki eserlere benzer çıktılar elde edilmesi istenen yapay zekânın, bunu yapabilmesi, daha evvel resim, fotoğraf, grafik ve video gibi görsellerle, musiki gibi ses tespitleriyle, kitap ile makale gibi metin tabanlı verilerle beslenmiş olmasına bağlıdır. Bu durum, yapay zekâ geliştiricileri ile fikrî ürünler üzerindeki telif hakkı sahipleri arasında kaçınılmaz bir menfaat çatışmasına sebep olmaktadır. Bu çatışmanın, hukuk düzeni tarafından hem yeniliği ve teknolojik gelişmeyi sekteye uğratmayacak ve hatta teşvik edecek, hem de telif hakkı himayesinin insan yaratıcılığını ve entelektüel emeği ödüllendirme işlevine zarar vermeyecek şekilde dengelenmesi gerekmektedir. Bu bağlamda, son 6–7 yıldır hem ulusal hem de uluslararası düzeyde yoğun tartışmalar yaşanmaktadır. Avrupa Birliği (AB), doğrudan yapay zekâ eğitimi amacı gütmese de bu amaca dolaylı olarak hizmet edebilecek nitelikte ve üye devletler düzeyinde uygulanabilir bazı düzenlemeler kabul etmiştir. Japonya ve Singapur gibi ülkeler, yapay zekâ ve makine öğrenimini doğrudan hedefleyen yasal ilkeler benimserken; Birleşik Devletler (ABD) gibi Anglo-Amerikan hukuk sistemine mensup ülkelerde ise, “âdil kullanım” (fair use) doktrini çerçevesinde içtihat yoluyla hukuki yönelimler geliştirilmeye çalışılmaktadır. Türkiye’de ise henüz bu konuda herhangi bir yasal düzenleme yapılmadığı gibi, tespit edebildiğimiz kadarıyla yargıya intikal etmiş bir uyuşmazlık da bulunmamaktadır. Bu makalede; AB, Almanya, ABD, Japonya ve Singapur gibi bazı ülkelerde, yapay zekâ eğitimi kapsamında fikir ve sanat eserlerinin kullanımına ilişkin telif hukuku perspektifinden hem yasal düzenlemeler hem de uygulamadaki yaklaşımlar tespit edilemeye çalışılmaktadır. Makalede özellikle AB’deki metin ve veri madenciliği (text and data mining), Japonya’daki “haz alma amacı dışında kullanım” (non-enjoyment) ile Singapur’daki “bilgisayarla veri analiz” (computational data analysis) istisnaları ve ABD’deki âdil kullanım doktrini üzerinde durulmaktadır. Sonuçta ise Türkiye’de mevcut mevzuat çerçevesinde bu meseleye çözüm bulunup bulunamayacağı tartışılmakta ve ülkemizde konuyla ilgili genel kabul görmüş normlar oluşuncaya kadar bağlayıcı düzenlemelerden kaçınılmasının yerinde olacağı yönünde bir değerlendirme yapılmaktadır.

Objective: To compare in-hospital mortality rates of ST-Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction (STEMI) patients based on their admission times, either during on or off hours. Study Design: Prospective Longitudinal Study. Place and Duration of Study: Cardiology Department, Ayub Teaching Hospital, Abbottabad Pakistan, from Aug to Dec 2019. Methodology: This study recruited STEMI patients from a tertiary care hospital. A validated questionnaire was used to collect patient data regarding demographic profiles. Data was collected by consecutive non-probability sampling. Results: A total of 266 patients were included; 74 were admitted during regular hours, while 192 were admitted during off-hours. There was no significant difference in thrombolysis time between regular and off-hours. In-hospital mortality occurred in 14(18.9%) patients admitted during regular hours and 19(9.9%) patients admitted during off-hours, indicating higher mortality during regular hours (p-value =0.040). The door-to-thrombolysis time during either period was not linked to increased mortality. Systolic blood pressure at admission was a significant variable associated with higher mortality (p-value =0.001). This suggests that patient disease severity at the time of admission may explain the difference in mortality, rather than the admission time itself. Conclusion: Mortality difference exists among STEMI patients during on hours and off hours, which is attributed to the severity of disease at admission, and not to the difference in provision of medical care at off time or staff availability. These results suggest that an aggressive treatment protocol should be administered to STEMI patients with hemodynamic compromise.

OBJECTIVE: Ankylosing Spondylitis (AS) is a chronic disease that can have multidimensional effects, extending beyond limitations on physical functioning to impact social relationships and psychological well-being. Understanding these complex effects on daily living activities and overall functionality is critically important for developing effective rehabilitation approaches. However, the existing literature contains a limited number of studies that evaluate the functional impact of AS on individuals from a multidimensional perspective. This study aims to qualitatively examine the effects of AS on the daily living activities and functionality of individuals diagnosed with the condition, within the framework of the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) model. MATERIALS and METHODS: This study was designed using a qualitative case study approach. Face-to-face semi-structured interviews were conducted with 20 individuals (n=20) who had been diagnosed with AS and followed for at least one year at the Department of Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation, Uşak University. The data were analyzed using the thematic analysis method developed by Braun and Clarke (1). RESULTS: As a result of the content analysis, 52 codes derived from participants’ statements were grouped under 5 main themes and 12 subthemes. All participants reported experiencing significant limitations in their daily activities due to physical symptoms such as chronic pain, morning stiffness, and fatigue. These symptoms were associated with widespread functional impairments, particularly in areas such as employment, use of public transportation, personal care, and social interaction. Additionally, difficulties in accessing medications and healthcare services were found to negatively affect treatment adherence and overall functionality. CONCLUSION: Ankylosing Spondylitis creates a complex impact that affects not only individuals’ physical capacity but also their social, psychological, and environmental dimensions. The ICF model offers an effective framework for understanding these multidimensional effects of the disease and for developing individualized rehabilitation strategies. The findings of this study highlight the necessity of a holistic, patient-centered, and function-oriented approach in the management of AS.

Abstract Background The effects of aspirin on hepatic steatosis and fibroinflammation are unclear. The study aimed to examine the association between aspirin use and liver MRI-derived liver fat and corrected T1 (cT1). Methods We used UK Biobank imaging cohort data. Aspirin use was self-reported at baseline and imaging assessment, and the main exposures were aspirin use at imaging assessment and longitudinal aspirin use patterns (never users, initiators, discontinuers, vs. persistent users). Outcomes were MRI-derived liver fat (%) and cT1 (ms). Multivariable adjustment analyses and inverse probability of treatment weighting (IPTW) analyses were performed, accounting for demographic, lifestyle and clinical factors. Results We included 36413 participants (age 64.6 years, 51.4% female). Aspirin use at imaging assessment was associated with lower liver fat (-0.35 (95% CI: -0.51, - 0.20)) and slightly higher cT1 (5.13 (95% CI: 3.23, 7.03)). Analyses on longitudinal aspirin use pattern showed that compared to never users, initiators and persistent users showed lower liver fat (-0.48 (-0.69, -0.28) and (-0.24 (-0.45, -0.02)) and higher cT1 (2.94 (0.38, 5.49) and 8.31 (5.65, 10.97)). IPTW analyses showed consistent results. Conclusion In this large population-based cohort, aspirin use was linked to reduced liver fat, but a small, clinically insignificant (i.e. &lt;80ms) increase in cT1. These findings suggest aspirin may mitigate steatosis through metabolic pathways but does not necessarily rapidly reverse fibroinflammatory injury.

Childhood malnutrition remains a critical issue in Tanzania, impacting the health and development of children under five. Early detection and intervention are vital to mitigating its effects, yet they are often hampered by a lack of effective tools. This study addresses this challenge by developing a data-driven system that uses machine learning to predict malnutrition risks early in childhood. Unlike previous studies that focused on limited data types or specific regions, this research presents an original approach that integrates multiple data categories to enhance prediction accuracy and relevance to the Tanzanian context. T he system analyzes a range of factors, including socioeconomic factors (poorest, Urban-Rural), health data such (height, weight, stunted, wasted, underweight, sex and age) and environmental variables (healthy status), to identify at-risk children before they exhibit significant symptoms. By leveraging a Random Forest algorithm, the study achieved a high accuracy of 96%, demonstrating the model's strong predictive performance. The data used for model development were obtained from a publicly available Kaggle dataset, which provides a valuable foundation but also represents limitations, as the secondary and non-Tanzanian data may affect the model’s generalizability to local contexts.

Notaljia Parestetika (NP), skapular bölgede kronik kaşıntı, parestezi ve bazen de ağrı ile karakterize, yaygın ancak sıklıkla göz ardı edilen nöropatik bir sendromdur. Etiyolojisi tam olarak aydınlatılamamış olsa da T2-T6 spinal sinirlerin dorsal dallarının dejeneratif omurga değişiklikleri veya paraspinal kas spazmları nedeniyle tuzaklanmasının bir sonucu olduğu düşünülmektedir. Bu olgu sunumunda, uzun süredir devam eden sırt ağrısı ve kaşıntı şikayetiyle başvuran ve multidisipliner yaklaşımla NP tanısı konulan ileri yaşta bir hastanın tanı ve tedavi süreci literatür eşliğinde tartışılmaktadır. Yetmiş sekiz yaşında kadın hasta, Balıkesir Üniversitesi Hastanesi Fiziksel Tıp ve Rehabilitasyon polikliniğine sağ skapula bölgesinde yoğunlaşan, hareketle artan, istirahatle azalan mekanik karakterde sırt ağrısı ve bu ağrıya eşlik eden kronik kaşıntı ve yanma şikayetleriyle başvurdu. Özgeçmişinde hiperlipidemi mevcuttu. Fizik muayenede, sağ skapula inferiorunda ve torakal paravertebral alanda kronik kaşımaya bağlı sekonder hiperpigmente maküler lezyonlar saptandı. Palpasyonda torakal paraspinal alanda bilateral kas spazmı, fibröz bantlar ve spinöz çıkıntılarda hassasiyet vardı. Torakal ekstansiyonu ve servikal eklem hareket açıklığı her yöne ağrılı ve kısıtlıydı. Nörolojik muayenesi ve laboratuvar testleri normal sınırlardaydı. Radyolojik değerlendirmede, torakal ve servikal vertebrada spondiloz ile uyumlu ileri düzeyde dejeneratif değişiklikler gözlendi (Figür 1). Dermatoloji konsültasyonu ile birlikte değerlendirilen hastaya, klinik ve radyolojik bulgular ışığında NP tanısı konuldu. Hastaya topikal kapsaisin ve kortikosteroid, sistemik gabapentin (300 mg 2x1) ile 10 seans olmak üzere 30 dk/gün yüksek frekanslı (50-100Hz) düşük amplitüdlü (1-100mA) transkutanöz elektrik stimülasyonu (TENS), 30 dk sıcak paket uygulama, 5 dk 1.5 watt/cm2, 3 MHZ frekansında terapötik ultrason ve 3 seans mezoterapi (prilokain, b12 vitamini, tiyokolşikosid, meloksikam) içeren kombine bir tedavi protokolü uygulandı. Tedavi protokolünün tamamlanmasının ardından hastanın ağrı, kaşıntı ve yanma şikayetlerinde belirgin bir gerileme gözlendi. NP, özellikle dejeneratif omurgadeğişiklikleri olan yaşlı hastalarda, kronik sırt ağrısı ve kaşıntının ayırıcı tanısında mutlaka akılda tutulması gereken önemli bir durumdur. Bu olgu, başarılı bir sonuç için detaylı anamnez, fizik muayene ve multidisipliner tedavi yaklaşımlarının kombinasyonunun kritik önem taşıdığını vurgulamaktadır.

Giriş: Duygusal dayanıklılık; bireyin stres ve olumsuz durumlarla başa çıkma, zorluklara karşı hızlı toparlanma becerisi olarak tanımlanmaktadır. Dayanıklılığı yüksek olan bireyler, yaşamın getirdiği güçlükler karşısında refahlarını sürdürebilir ve yaşam doyumları daha yüksek olabilmektedir. Gebelik, kadının hem fiziksel hem de duygusal açıdan yoğun değişimler yaşadığı bir dönemdir. Özellikle ilk gebeliklerde kaygı, stres ve belirsizlik sıkça görülmektedir. Bu süreçte yüksek duygusal dayanıklılık, stresin daha etkin yönetilmesini sağlayabilir ve doğum sonrası depresyon gibi ruhsal sorunların riskini azaltabilir. Yöntem: Derleme niteliğinde yapılan çalışma için Ocak-Haziran 2025 tarihleri arasında “Duygusal Dayanıklılık”, “Stres”, “Gebelik”, “Ebelik” ve konuyla bağlantılı kelimeler veri tabanlarında (Google Scholar, Pubmed, WOS) taranmıştır. Bulgular: Literatürde, gebeliğe özgü stresin erken doğum ve fetal gelişim geriliği ile ilişkili olduğu; ayrıca doğum sonrası depresyon ve anksiyete gibi psikolojik sorunların önemli bir belirleyicisi olabileceği belirtilmektedir. Bununla birlikte, duygusal dayanıklılığın stresin uyku kalitesi üzerindeki olumsuz etkilerini azaltmada koruyucu bir rol oynadığı vurgulanmaktadır. Sonuç: Duygusal dayanıklılık, gebelik sürecinde kadının psikolojik sağlığının korunması, stresle etkili bir biçimde başa çıkabilmesi ve olumlu bir doğum deneyimi yaşayabilmesi açısından kritik bir beceri olarak değerlendirilmektedir. Dolayısıyla, ebeler başta olmak üzere aile ve toplumun destekleyici, kapsayıcı ve güçlendirici bir tutum sergilemesi büyük önem taşımaktadır.

Latar Belakang: Program Indonesia Sehat dengan Pendekatan Keluarga (PIS-PK) merupakan inisiatif pemerintah Indonesia untuk meningkatkan kesehatan masyarakat melalui pendekatan berbasis keluarga. Namun, pelaksanaan PIS-PK di Kabupaten Majalengka hingga 2024 belum mencapai target optimal, dengan capaian saat ini hanya 0,588 (Pra Sehat), sementara target nasional adalah 0,81 (Sehat). Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mengetahui faktor-faktor yang berhubungan dengan capaian PIS-PK di Puskesmas Kabupaten Majalengka.Metode: Penelitian ini menggunakan metode survei analitik dengan desain penelitian korelasional. Sampel penelitian terdiri dari 32 responden yang merupakan pengelola PIS-PK di Puskesmas, dengan teknik pengumpulan data menggunakan kuesioner dan analisis Chi-Square serta regresi logistik.Hasil: Penelitian menunjukkan adanya hubungan antara supervisi pimpinan (p=0,006), sarana prasarana (p=0,001), dan beban kerja (p=0,000) dengan capaian PIS-PK. Namun, tidak ada hubungan antara kompensasi (p=0,387), pendidikan (p=0,254), dan pelatihan (p=0,168) dengan capaian PIS-PK. Variabel yang paling dominan adalah beban kerja.Kesimpulan: Variabel yang paling dominan adalah beban kerja. Pembagian tugas dan beban kerja yang jelas diharapkan dapat meningkatkan capaian PIS-PK di Puskesmas Kabupaten Majalengka.

Spotify merupakan salah satu platform streaming musik populer yang menghasilkan banyak ulasan dari pengguna. Analisis sentimen pada ulasan tersebut penting untuk mengetahui persepsi dan tingkat kepuasan pengguna. Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mengklasifikasikan sentimen ulasan Spotify menggunakan dua model deep learning, yaitu Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) dan Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU). Dataset yang digunakan berjumlah 61.587 ulasan dengan dua kategori sentimen, yaitu positif dan negatif. Tahapan penelitian meliputi pra-proses teks, tokenisasi, padding, pemisahan data, pelatihan model, dan evaluasi. Model dilatih menggunakan embedding bawaan Keras dengan optimizer Adam. Hasil evaluasi menunjukkan bahwa LSTM memperoleh akurasi 0.8950, sedangkan GRU mencapai 0.8922. Kedua model menunjukkan performa yang stabil berdasarkan nilai precision, recall, dan F1-score. Berdasarkan hasil tersebut, LSTM memiliki performa sedikit lebih baik, namun GRU tetap menjadi alternatif yang efisien dengan hasil yang mendekati LSTM.

Las metodologías activas se definen como enfoques pedagógicos que priorizan la participación activa del estudiante en su propio aprendizaje, buscando formar ciudadanos conscientes, críticos y capaces de transformar su entorno. Estas metodologías buscan superar el modelo tradicional de enseñanza, promoviendo la resolución de problemas, la experimentación, la colaboración y el uso de recursos dinámicos y contextualizados. En el campo de la enseñanza de la química, representan una alternativa significativa, dado que esta disciplina suele involucrar conceptos abstractos, fórmulas y procesos que pueden resultar complejos si se abordan únicamente desde una perspectiva memorística o expositiva. El objetivo de este estudio fue describir las metodológicas activas para la enseñanza de la química a estudiantes con Trastorno del Espectro Autista (TEA) en educación media general, la investigación se basó en una revisión documental y análisis crítico de literatura publicada entre 2017 y 2024, seleccionada en base de datos académicas y repositorios especializados. Como instrumento para recoger la información se utilizó una ficha de contenido de donde se sugirieron 4 estrategias principales para la enseñanza de la química, tales como: el aprendizaje basado en problemas, pictogramas, gamificación y el aprendizaje colaborativo; estas estrategias favorecen la inclusión educativa, facilitan la comprensión de conceptos abstractos, promueven la participación activa, es por ello, que estas metodologías actúan como herramientas inclusivas que promueven la participación y comprensión de los estudiantes. Se concluye que la incorporación de estas estrategias requiere la actualización en la formación docente y el fortalecimiento de los recursos pedagógicos adaptados para los estudiantes con (TEA) y fomentar así su desarrollo integral.

&lt;p&gt;Investigator response assessment of irradiated lesions, per modified itRECIST&lt;/p&gt;

A humanização no contexto da saúde está estreitamente relacionada à abordagem integral do cuidado, com destaque para a atenção à saúde do paciente, sua autonomia e a promoção de práticas interprofissionais e interdisciplinares. A humanização no setor de radiologia pode incentivar as pessoas a realizarem exames de imagem e procedimentos de rotina. É exigido pelo ministério da educação a inclusão de conceitos de humanização nos currículos dos cursos superiores, isso repercute na formação do tecnólogo em radiologia. O Objetivo deste trabalho foi conhecer a percepção dos discentes do curso Tecnólogo em Radiologia, de uma universidade do interior da Bahia, acerca da importância da humanização na atuação dos futuros profissionais das técnicas radiológicas. A Pesquisa de campo é de natureza aplicada e cunho exploratório com abordagem qualiquantitativa. Os participantes deste estudo incluem os discentes do curso de Tecnólogo em Radiologia, do primeiro ao sexto semestre, devidamente matriculados e assíduos no curso. A coleta de dados sucedeu-se através de um formulário com perguntas semiestruturadas. Os dados coletados foram organizados em planilhas criadas no programa Microsoft Excel® e após a tabulação, analisados por uma estatística descritiva. O projeto foi aprovado conforme o Certificado de Apresentação de Apreciação Ética (CAAE) Nº 78970524.4.0000.5025, parecer Nº 6.770.651. Observou-se predominância de estudantes no 1º semestre (24,5%) e de discentes que ainda não cursavam estágio curricular obrigatório (71,4%). A maioria referiu ter tido contato com conteúdos de humanização durante a graduação (77,5%), principalmente em disciplinas curriculares (53,1%) e em palestras (36,7%). Entre as práticas associadas à humanização, destacaram-se empatia (34,0%), respeito (25,0%) e comunicação (15,9%). Com isso, foi possível constatar que o primeiro semestre demonstrou maior percepção sobre a importância da humanização para a sua futura formação profissional.

World Health Organization (WHO) tahun 2020, menyatakan bahwa asfiksia menyebabkan kematian neonatus antara 8,35% di negara maju dan 31-56,5% di negara berkembang. Angka Kematian Bayi (AKB) di dunia mencapai 2,4 juta kematian bayi di tahun 2020. Asfiksia merupakan salah satu penyebab utama kematian bayi. Faktor resiko yang meningkatkan insiden asfiksia di anataranya adalah BBLR, KPD dan partus lama. Tujuan penelitian ini untuk mengetahui faktor-faktor yang berhubungan secara simultan dengan kejadian asfiksia pada bayi baru lahir di RSD Besemah Kota Pagar Alam Tahun 2023. Penelitian ini menggunakan metode survey analitik dengan pendekatan cross sectional. Populasi penelitian ini adalah semua bayi baru lahir di RSD Besemah Kota Pagar Alam Tahun 2023 dengan jumlah sampel sebanyak83 orang. Pengambilan sampel dengan menggunakan metode Systematic Random Sampling. Hasil penelitian ini didapatkan ada hubungan yang signifikan anatara BBLR (p-value = 0,017 dan OR = 11,176), KPD (p-value = 0,047 dan OR = 5,625) dan Partus Lama (p-value = 0,031 dan OR = 6.300) dengan kejadian Asfiksia pada bayi baru lahir di RSD Besemah Kota Pagar Alam Tahun 2023. Diharapkan hasil dari penelitian ini dapat meningkatkan pelayanan kesehatan dan pengetahuan tentang kejadian asfiksia dan menurunkan Angka Kematian Bayi (AKB).

This report presents a compilation of plant disease occurrences in Korea based on field observations conducted by members of the Field Research Committee of the Korean Society of Plant Pathology in 2025. The dataset documents cases of emerging and recurrent diseases—including soil-borne pathogens, viral complexes, and foliar diseases—reported from various agricultural regions where committee members carried out surveys. Although the records do not constitute a comprehensive national survey, they provide georeferenced, metadata-rich occurrence information that serves as a useful reference for identifying when and where specific diseases were observed. These findings also reflect broader trends in disease emergence under variable climate conditions and highlight the value of continued field-based monitoring to support predictive modeling, risk assessment, and evidence-based plant disease management in Korea.

Background: Currently, there is limited literature that highlights the rate of reoperation or requiring additional corticosteroid injections following surgical trigger finger release. This study determined the incidence of additional corticosteroid injection or reoperation of the same digit in patients who underwent trigger finger release. Risk factors for requiring subsequent treatment in the same digit following trigger finger release were also identified. Methods: This retrospective cohort study evaluated patients who underwent primary trigger finger release from 2015 to 2017. The incidence of further treatment with either steroid injection or reoperation of the same digit following trigger finger release was determined. Multivariate regression was performed to identify independent risk factors for requiring further treatment with injection or surgery. Results: In total, 2.68% of patients required further treatment with either surgery or injection in the same digit following initial surgical release. Specifically, 0.76% of patients underwent reoperation while 1.92% required an additional injection. Multivariate regression demonstrated that releasing the index, middle, or multiple fingers during the initial trigger finger release was predictive of requiring further treatment. Conclusions: The incidence of reoperation following trigger finger release is less than 1% of patients, which supports previous research. We also established the rate of injection in the same digit following surgery to be 1.92%. This study may provide valuable information for surgeons when communicating with patients about the necessity of additional treatment following trigger finger release. In addition, it can help patients understand the outcomes of surgical management for severe trigger finger symptoms.

Patient safety is a fundamental principle in healthcare services and a global challenge. This study analyzes the implementation of a patient safety culture at BIMC HospitalKuta. Using a mixed-methods approach with a sequential exploratory design, qualitative data were collected through in-depth interviews and observations of the nursing director, safety officer, head nurse, and implementing nurses. Qualitative analysis was conducted using the Miles and Huberman model, followed by quantitative research using the HSOPSC questionnaire which was analyzed descriptively. Qualitative findings indicate that the patient safety culture in this hospital has been integrated into the staff's work habits, despite challenges such as fear of sanctions when reporting incidents and technical issues with the electronic reporting system. On the other hand, the quantitative results show a positive perception, with a Mean of 4.602 and a Median of 5.000 for positive statements, as well as a Mean of 1.347 with a Median of 1.000 for negative statements, indicating that respondents do not perceive any obstacles in the implementation of the patient safety culture. The difference in results between qualitative and quantitative research is caused by differing individual and public perceptions. The implementation of a safety culture in this hospital is influenced by nursing leadership and management support, with an effective incident reporting system through the MedBlaze platform that prioritizes the principles of just culture.

Purpose: This study examined the influences of nurses’ perceptions of patient safety culture and patient safety knowledge on their patient safety nursing activities in general hospitals.Methods: A structured questionnaire was used to collect data on nurses’ perceptions of patient safety culture, patient safety knowledge, and patient safety nursing activities. Data from 181 nurses at two general hospitals were analyzed using independent t-tests, one-way ANOVA, correlation analysis, and multiple regression.Results: Patient safety nursing activities were positively correlated with patient safety culture (r=.22, &lt;i&gt;p&lt;/i&gt;=.003) and patient safety knowledge (r=.37, &lt;i&gt;p&lt;/i&gt;&lt;.001). Patient safety knowledge emerged as a significant predictor (&lt;i&gt;β&lt;/i&gt;=.32), explaining 17% of the variance in patient safety nursing activities (F=6.15, &lt;i&gt;p&lt;/i&gt;&lt;.001).Conclusion: Patient safety knowledge was identified as a key predictor of patient safety nursing activities, highlighting the need for structured educational programs and supportive organizational environments.

Knowledge-sharing is a deliberate exchange of information to enhance accessibility and reuse which is critical for improving healthcare delivery. This study assessed knowledge-sharing practices among dentists, pharmacists, and allied health professionals (AHPs) in nine public hospitals in South Africa’s Eastern Cape Province. A cross-sectional survey was conducted using purposive and stratified random sampling to recruit 99 participants. Data were collected via a validated questionnaire and analysed with SPSS v.22.0 using descriptive statistics. Respondents were predominantly female (77.6%) and aged 21–35 years (63.6%); AHPs comprised 65.7% of the sample. The results show a statistically significant association between profession and encouragement to adopt a global perspective (p = 0.017), while significant differences were observed between profession and encouragement to seek inter-team solutions (p = 0.020), and access to leadership-driven opportunities for interdisciplinary knowledge-sharing (p = 0.016). Despite observable patterns in the descriptive results, no other statistically significant differences by profession were observed for all other items. Collaboration with external communities and leadership-driven knowledge-sharing opportunities were also highest among dentists but limited overall. Adoption of information systems for knowledge exchange was low, particularly among pharmacists and AHPs. Participation in professional development and recognition of long-term knowledge-sharing strategies followed similar patterns. These findings highlight the need to strengthen leadership-driven opportunities for interdisciplinary knowledge-sharing and to develop targeted interventions to address specific gaps between professions.

Celem niniejszego artykułu jest zwrócenie uwagi na to, że deficyt komunikacji interpersonalnej jest istotnym czynnikiem mogącym stanowić o orzeczeniu nieważności małżeństwa w powiązaniu z niezdolnością do podjęcia istotnych obowiązków małżeńskich. U podstaw zaburzonej komunikacji w małżeństwie leży szereg czynników, które sprawiają, że małżonkowie niejednokrotnie nie są w stanie sprostać budowaniu wspólnoty życia małżeńskiego opartego na dialogu, partnerstwie, trwałości i dobru małżonków. Wiele małżeństw rozpada się z powodu rzekomej niezgodności charakterów, jednak powodem takiego stanu rzeczy jest wieloaspektowa niedojrzałość do życia w małżeństwie. Deficyt komunikowania potrzeb zarówno jednej, jak i drugiej strony prowadzi do nieporozumień, konfliktów, a ostatecznie kryzysów czy rozpadu małżeństwa.Deficyt komunikacji interpersonalnej jest jednym z czynników, który w poważnym stopniu przyczynia się do orzeczenia nieważności małżeństwa z tytułu psychicznej niezdolności do podjęcia istotnych obowiązków małżeńskich po jednej lub z obojga stron. Analiza prowadzi do wniosku, że deficyt komunikacji małżeńskiej ma wpływ na zdolność do wyrażenia zgody małżeńskiej w zakresie tworzenia i podtrzymania wspólnoty życia.

ML models based on IL-39 and IL-40 serum levels can effectively differentiate RA from SLE. The findings suggest that integrating artificial intelligence-based analytical approaches with novel cytokine biomarkers may enhance diagnostic precision and support differential diagnosis in autoimmune diseases.

The declining number of end-stage renal disease (ESRD) patients who opt for Continuous Ambulatory Peritoneal Dialysis (CAPD) as a renal replacement therapy is influenced by several factors, including high infection rates, limited patient and family knowledge, and restricted access to CAPD services. However, research exploring the perspectives of healthcare professionals, such as dialysis nurses and nephrologists, on this phenomenon remains limited. This study aimed to explore the perspectives of dialysis nurses and nephrologists regarding barriers to CAPD utilization. A qualitative descriptive design was employed, using semi-structured interviews with 12 participants, including 10 dialysis nurses and 2 nephrologists at a tertiary hospital in West Sumatra, Indonesia. Data were analyzed using Colaizzi’s seven-step method. Five major themes emerged: (1) Weak coordination, unsupportive policies, and limited expertise; (2) Infection risk as the primary challenge in CAPD; (3) Ineffective patient and family education in CAPD care; (4) Psychological barriers to accepting CAPD therapy; and (5) Determinants of patient decision-making in choosing CAPD, and 15 Sub-themes. This study highlights the barriers that patients face when choosing CAPD as a renal replacement therapy. Unsupportive policies, increased infection risks, and inadequate educational systems were identified as key challenges that require urgent evaluation and improvement. Strengthening these aspects is crucial to ensure optimal care for patients who opt for CAPD. Keyword: Indonesia, Nephrologist, Nurse Perspective, Peritoneal Dialysis, Qualitative Study

Aim: The purpose of this study was to compare upper cervical vertebral anomalies (CVAs) between patients with cleft lip and palate (CLP) and healthy individuals using cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT). Materials and Methods: CBCT images of 100 CLP patients and 100 controls were analyzed. CVAs including occipitalization, fusion, block fusion, cleft, os odontoideum, ossiculum terminale, and arcuate foramen, were evaluated. Results: CVAs were detected in 23% of CLP patients and 14% of controls. The most frequent anomaly was arcuate foramen (17% in CLP, 11% in controls), followed by vertebral cleft and fusion (each 3% in CLP). No cases of occipitalisation, block fusion, os odontoideum, or ossiculum terminale were observed. There were no significant differences between CLP and control groups or between unilateral and bilateral CLP (p&amp;gt;0.05). Conclusion: CVAs can be reliably evaluated using CBCT, and they may occur more frequently in patients with CLP.

Epilepsy is considered to be present when 2 or more unprovoked seizures occur in a time frame of longer than 24 hours. Objectives: To determine the knowledge, attitude, and practice of parents of children with epilepsy. Methods: This descriptive cross-sectional study was conducted at the Outpatient Department of Pediatric Neurology, National Institute of Child Health, Karachi, Pakistan, from January to June 2025. A total of 262 parents of children aged 1–12 years with epilepsy for ≥6 months were enrolled through non-probability consecutive sampling. A structured 15-item KAP questionnaire (7 knowledge, 5 attitudes, 3 practice) was developed, validated by experts, pilot tested on 20 parents, and showed good reliability (Cronbach’s alpha 0.81). Scores ≥12/15 were classified as good KAP. Analysis was performed using SPSS version 26.0, with chi-square applied post-stratification, taking p&lt;0.05 as significant. Results: In 262 parents, the mean age was 34.6 ± 7.8 years; 117 (44.7%) were fathers, and 145 (55.3%) were mothers. Good knowledge was noted in 209 (79.8%), favorable attitude in 142 (54.2%), and good practice in 122 (46.6%). Overall, a good KAP was observed in 138 (52.7%). Good KAP was associated with urban residence (p=0.006), higher education (p&lt;0.001), and healthcare professionals as information source (p=0.002), but not with gender, age, or income. Conclusions: Most parents had adequate knowledge about epilepsy, while attitudes and practices were comparatively less satisfactory. Better knowledge, attitude, and practice were observed among parents with higher education, those living in urban areas, and those who received information from healthcare professionals.

Objectives: Hematological indices are a frequently investigated area due to the important role of inflammation in the pathogenesis of new-onset atrial fibrillation (NOAF). Our study aimed to investigate the relationship between eosinophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (ELR) and eosinophil-to-monocyte ratio (EMR) and the development of NOAF in patients with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). Materials and Methods: In this retrospective study, 344 STEMI patients were evaluated and divided into two groups based on the development of NOAF (NOAF+: n=36, NOAF-: n=308). The discriminatory power and independence of hematological parameters and indices were evaluated using ROC analysis, logistic regression, and principal component analysis (PCA). Results: Patients with NOAF had significantly lower eosinophil counts and EMR values compared to the control group, but higher monocyte counts (all p

Background: Ventral hernia is a common abdominal wall defect that often requires surgical repair. Open ventral hernia repair (OVHR) has traditionally been used, but laparoscopic ventral hernia repair (LVHR) is gaining preference due to its minimally invasive approach and potential benefits in recovery and complications. Aims and Objectives: This study aims to compare the clinical outcomes, post-operative complications, and recovery profiles of laparoscopic versus OVHR. Materials and Methods: A prospective comparative study was conducted in the Department of General Surgery, Government Medical College, Datia, from October 2024 to September 2025. A total of 70 patients with ventral hernia were randomly assigned to undergo LVHR (n=35) or OVHR (n=35). Intraoperative variables, post-operative pain (Visual Analog Scale scores), recovery parameters, complications, and recurrence at 6 months were assessed. Results: The laparoscopic group had a significantly longer mean operative time (72.5±16.0 vs. 60.8±15.2 min, P=0.02) but demonstrated lower intraoperative blood loss (50±20 vs. 115±35 mL, P=0.001). Post-operative pain was significantly less in LVHR patients at days 1, 3, and 7 (all P&lt;0.01). Recovery was faster, with earlier ambulation (1.3±0.5 vs. 2.4±0.9 days, P=0.001), shorter hospital stay (2.9±0.9 vs. 6.6±3.7 days, P=0.001), and quicker return to daily activities (12.0±4.0 vs. 17.2±5.2 days, P=0.001). Wound infection was lower in LVHR (2.9% vs. 17.1%, P=0.04). No recurrence was observed in LVHR compared to two cases in OVHR. Conclusion: LVHR provides superior post-operative outcomes compared to OVHR, with less pain, faster recovery, shorter hospitalization, and fewer complications, despite a slightly longer operative time. It should be considered the preferred approach in eligible patients where resources and surgical expertise are available.

La reducción de la morbimortalidad materna sigue siendo una prioridad en salud pública debido a la persistencia de complicaciones obstétricas prevenibles vinculadas a fallas en la detección temprana y en la activación oportuna de protocolos de emergencia. En este contexto, el estudio tuvo como propósito analizar la efectividad de la respuesta enfermera en la activación de claves obstétricas mediante una revisión sistemática de literatura reciente. Se realizó una revisión con enfoque cuantitativo-analítico, siguiendo los lineamientos PRISMA 2020, a partir de búsquedas en bases científicas internacionales. Se incluyeron 20 estudios publicados entre 2020 y 2025 en español e inglés que abordaron la participación de enfermería en emergencias obstétricas. Los resultados muestran que una respuesta enfermera organizada, basada en protocolos estandarizados, simulación clínica y monitoreo continuo, reduce los tiempos de actuación, mejora la detección de signos de alarma y disminuye complicaciones como hemorragia posparto y shock hipovolémico. Asimismo, el liderazgo clínico y la coordinación interprofesional fortalecen la eficacia de los equipos de respuesta rápida. En conclusión, la intervención enfermera protocolizada es esencial para optimizar la seguridad materna y disminuir la morbimortalidad.

İnsanlık tarihi kadar eski bir kurum olan kölelik 19. yüzyıla kadar devam etmiş ve bu süreç içerisinde birçok devlet tarafından kullanılmıştır. Kölelik sistemi diğer devletlerde olduğu gibi Osmanlı Devleti’nde de yerini almış ve son dönemlerine kadar varlığını korumuştur. Köle kullanımı belli bir sermaye gerektirdiği için köle sahibi olacak kişinin maddi açıdan belli bir seviyede birikimi olması gerekir. Ayrıca köle sahibi olmak toplumda mevki ve statü göstergesi olarak da kabul edilmiştir. Ekonomik ve sosyal hayatın her alanında yararlanılan kölelerin maddi açıdan sınırlı bir gelire sahip köy insanının hayatında yer alıp almadığı ise araştırmamızın esas konusunu oluşturmaktadır. Bu doğrultuda Konya kırsalında yaşayan köylüler ne oranda ve nasıl köle sahibi olabiliyorlardı? Köle sahipleri, köle emeğinden hangi alanlarda ve nasıl yararlanıyorlardı? Köleler ile ne tür problemler yaşanıyordu? Bu gibi sorulara çalışmanın ana kaynağını oluşturan Şer’iyye Sicillerinin ışığında cevap aranacaktır.

Bu araştırma, Gençlik ve Spor Bakanlığı’na bağlı KYK yurtlarında yürütülen din ve değerler eğitimi etkinliklerinin üniversite öğrencilerinin görüşleri doğrultusunda değerlendirilmesini ve bu etkinliklere katılan öğrencilerin memnuniyet düzeylerinin belirlenmesini amaçlamaktadır. Araştırma nicel araştırma yöntemlerinden ilişkisel tarama modelinde yapılandırılmıştır. Çalışmanın evrenini, 2023-2024 öğretim yılı bahar döneminde Malatya il merkezinde bulunan KYK yurtlarında kalan üniversite öğrencileri oluşturmuştur. Basit rastgele örnekleme yöntemi ile belirlenen 545 öğrenci araştırma örneklemine dahil edilmiştir. Bu öğrenciler arasından din ve değerler eğitimi etkinliklerine katılan 178 kişinin bu faaliyetlerden duydukları memnuniyet düzeyleri analiz edilmiştir. Veriler, araştırmacılarca hazırlanan kişisel bilgi formu ile “KYK Yurtlarında Sunulan Din ve Değerler Eğitimi Faaliyetleri Öğrenci Memnuniyet Ölçeği” aracılığıyla toplanmış; analiz işlemleri SPSS 26.0 programı kullanılarak gerçekleştirilmiştir. Analiz sürecinde normallik testi, bağımsız örneklem t-testi ve tek yönlü ANOVA gibi istatistiksel tekniklerden yararlanılmıştır. Elde edilen bulgulara göre, din ve değerler eğitimi etkinliklerine hiç katılmamış öğrenciler, katılmama gerekçesi olarak en çok zaman sınırlılığı, bilgi eksikliği ve içerik hakkındaki çekinceleri dile getirmiştir. Etkinliklere katılan öğrencilerin genel memnuniyet düzeylerinin oldukça yüksek olduğu saptanmıştır. Ayrıca, memnuniyet düzeylerinin mezun olunan lise türü ve katılım sıklığı gibi bazı değişkenler açısından anlamlı biçimde farklılaştığı; buna karşın cinsiyet, yaş, öğrenim düzeyi vb. değişkenlere göre anlamlı bir farklılık göstermediği belirlenmiştir.

Bu araştırmada amaç, bireylerde sağlıklı ve sürdürülebilir yaşam tarzının sürdürülebilir tüketim davranışı üzerindeki etkisinde sağlığa verilen önemin aracılık rolünün belirlenmesidir. Araştırma Yozgat ili Merkez ilçesinde gerçekleştirilmiştir. Araştırmaya 18 yaş üzeri 364 birey katılım sağlamıştır. Veriler “Kişisel Bilgi Formu”, “Sağlıklı ve Sürdürülebilir Yaşam Tarzı Ölçeği”, “Sürdürülebilir Tüketim Davranışı Ölçeği” ve “Sağlığa Verilen Önem Alt Ölçeği” ile toplanmıştır. Verilerin analizinde SPSS 26 ve Process Macro 5.0 (Model 4) kullanılmıştır. Verilerin analizinde tanımlayıcı istatistikler, Pearson korelasyon analizi ve aracılık analizi için Process Macro 5.0 (Model 4) kullanılmıştır. Bireylerin %56,9’u erkek, %62,9’u evli, %38,7’si 20-30 yaş aralığında, %51,9’u üniversite mezunudur. Sağlıklı ve sürdürülebilir yaşam tarzı puan ortalaması 3,64±0,53; sürdürülebilir tüketim davranışı 3,67±0,84 ve sağlığa verilen önem 3,65±0,90’dır. Sağlık ve sürdürülebilir yaşam tarzının sürdürülebilir tüketim davranışı üzerinde doğrudan (β: ,389) ve dolaylı (β: ,172) etkisi anlamlı bulunmuştur. Bireylerde sürdürülebilir tüketim davranışı üzerindeki etkisinde sağlıklı ve sürdürülebilir yaşam tarzının anlamlı ve pozitif yönde etkisinin olduğu sağlığa verilen önemin aracılık gösterdiği sonucuna ulaşılmıştır.

Background: Medication safety competence is critical, yet how workplace and psychological factors shape medication safety competence is unclear. Purpose: To examine links among work environment, work-related stress, professional identity, and medication safety competence. Methods: A cross-sectional survey of 641 nurses in China was conducted and structural equation modeling was used to test relationships. Results: Professional identity predicted medication safety competence (β = .276, P &lt; .001) and partially mediated effects of work environment (indirect = 0.098; 95% CI, 0.063-0.146) and stress (indirect = 0.036; 95% CI, 0.021-0.056). Conclusions: Supportive environments and stronger professional identity are associated with higher medication safety competence, whereas stress is detrimental. Organizational strategies should enhance resources, reduce stressors, and cultivate professional identity to improve medication safety and ultimately improve patient safety outcomes.

Mục tiêu: Nhận xét kết quả điều trị viêm phần phụ được phẫu thuật tại Khoa Phụ sản – Bệnh viện Đại học Y Hà Nội. Đối tượng và phương pháp nghiên cứu: Nghiên cứu mô tả hồi cứu được tiến hành trên 62 bệnh nhân được chẩn đoán và điều trị viêm phần phụ được phẫu thuật tại Khoa Phụ sản từ tháng 9 năm 2023 đến tháng 3 năm 2025. Kết quả: Bệnh nhân chủ yếu ở độ tuổi từ 31 - 50 (87.1%), tuổi trung bình là 41.6 ± 6.5 tuổi. Tỷ lệ mổ mở (91.9%), mổ nội soi (8.1%). Chỉ định phẫu thuật viêm phần phụ cấp điều trị nội khoa không đáp ứng có tỷ lệ cao nhất (82.3%). Trong phẫu thuật, tổn thương hay gặp nhất là vòi tử cung ứ mủ (88.7%), dính tiểu khung (66.7%), vòi tử cung viêm dính (40.3%). Can thiệp trong phẫu thuật chủ yếu cắt 2 vòi tử cung (56.5%). Thời gian hậu phẫu trung bình 6.7 ± 1.0 ngày. Không có biến chứng sau phẫu thuật. Kết luận: Viêm phần phụ được điều trị chủ yếu là mổ mở, chỉ định phẫu thuật đa số là do điều trị nội khoa không đáp ứng. Không có bệnh nhân nào xảy ra biến chứng trong và sau phẫu thuật.

&lt;p&gt;Supplementary Figure S1&lt;/p&gt;

Introduction: Urinary tract infection (UTI) is a prevalent microbial infection that affects both males (20%) and females (80%), with an incidence of approximately three occurrences per year. Clinical symptoms include urinary frequency, urgency, suprapubic discomfort, and dysuria. While UTIs can be treated or prevented with antibiotics, continued use may lead to increased resistance and reduced efficacy. For this reason, herbal medicines are considered a viable strategy for treatment and for reducing multidrug resistance. Among these, Apium graveolens (celery) is of particular interest. This study aimed to evaluate the antimicrobial activity of Apium graveolens L., especially in the context of UTI infections. Materials and Methods: The plants were dried and subjected to hydroalcoholic extraction, followed by evaporation of the ethanol to obtain a dry powder. Phytochemical screening was conducted to determine the contents of tannins, total polyphenols, and total flavonoids. Sample Collection: 100 midstream urine samples were collected and inoculated onto three types of agar media: nutrient agar, MacConkey agar, and blood agar. Media Preparation: Media were prepared according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Bacterial Isolation: Isolated bacteria were identified using selective, differential, and general media based on colonial morphology, Gram staining, and biochemical tests. Results: In a study involving 100 UTI patients, 82% were female and 18% were male, with bacterial growth observed in 94 samples. Escherichia coli was the predominant pathogen (57.44%), followed by Klebsiella spp. (17.02%), Streptococcus spp. (10.6%), and other less common bacteria. Apium graveolens demonstrated promising dose-dependent antibacterial activity against various bacterial species, achieving inhibitory zones ranging from 5.5 mm to 14 mm, with notable effectiveness. Its impact on Proteus spp. was powerful, matching the efficacy of amoxicillin. Conclusion: According to this study, hydroalcoholic extraction of Apium graveolens significantly reduces bacterial infections, indicating its potential role in the management of UTIs.

After blunt abdominal trauma, severe injuries to the duodenum are rare but can be serious. As the duodenum lies retroperitoneally, perforation may not cause noticeable symptoms, leading to delayed diagnosis. Isolated duodenal perforation (IDP) is difficult to diagnose due to nonspecific symptoms. Early detection with a computed tomography (CT) scan is fundamental for saving lives.&nbsp; In prior studies, approximately 100 cases of IDP in children have been reported. The present study highlights the high index of clinical suspicion, along with the crucial role of the CT scan in detecting this injury. A 7-year-old boy arrived with worsening right abdominal pain, fever, and vomiting 9 days after a road traffic accident. Upon admission, leukocytosis (28.44 &times;10&sup3;/&micro;L) and contrast-enhanced abdominal CT&nbsp; findings revealed retroperitoneal free air and suspected bowel perforation. Exploratory laparotomy confirmed a 3 cm duodenal perforation, repaired by two-layer duodenorrhaphy and omental patch. Postoperative recovery was successful with multidisciplinary care. Therefore, isolated duodenal perforation warrants a high degree of suspicion in pediatric patients with blunt trauma. Early contrast-enhanced abdominal&nbsp; CT and prompt surgical intervention are crucial to reduce morbidity and mortality.

Autologous auricle reconstruction is widely accepted and used, with excellent results obtained from the hands of specialized surgeons. It is nevertheless an ever-evolving and advancing field, at the frontier of science and art, with a difficult surgical learning curve and complex postoperative management. Different strategies are used today, from fashioning the reconstruction from the patient’s rib cartilage to bioengineering prosthetics to achieve specific cosmetic and functional outcomes. In this work, the authors present the first true surgical guide to harvest rib cartilage and sculpt a neo-auricle using the contralateral mirrored ear, without the need for additional specific surgical instruments or artistic knowledge. The name “Robert-Houdin Auricle Box” refers to the sawing magic illusion, popularized by the famous French magician Robert-Houdin, in which he was the first to appear to saw an assistant safely in half. The surgeon in this concept performs the same procedure with his scalpel, passing through the 3D printed box slots to safely saw and sculpt the cartilage block trap inside, following an appropriate virtual surgical planning (VSP) session.

<title>Abstract</title> Decision-making and inhibition deficits are well documented among individuals with a history of suicide attempt (SAs), but the underlying neurobiological mechanisms remain unclear. This study investigated white matter (WM) tracts associated with intermediate phenotypes, namely, decision-making and inhibition, among SAs (n=48), patient controls (PCs; n=34), and healthy controls (HCs; n=49) using diffusion tensor imaging and tractometry, a novel method allowing pointwise investigation of WM microstructure. We hypothesized alterations in the striato-fronto-orbital tract (ST-FO), superior longitudinal fasciculus II (SLF-II), and cingulum bundle in SAs and subgroups, as well as associations between diffusion metrics and cognitive performance on the Iowa Gambling (IGT) and Go/No-Go tasks. As hypothesized, compared with the PCs and HCs, the SAs presented significant alterations in the right ST-FO, with elevated fractional anisotropy (FA) in the central segment and lower FA in the anterior segment; similar effects were observed for radial diffusivity (RD). RD values bilaterally and FA values in the left ST-FO correlated significantly with IGT performance. Additional RD and FA alterations were detected in the SLF-II, although no differences emerged between patient groups. No significant group differences were found in the cingulum bundle, although SAs made more Go/No-Go commission errors than both control groups. In addition, SAs who used violent suicide methods differed from nonviolent SAs in the central segments of the ST-FO tract in the RD. This is the first study to apply tractometry in SAs, providing novel evidence that WM alterations, mainly in orbitofronto-striatal pathways, are linked to cognitive deficits relevant to suicidal behavior.

Stafilokoklar, kateterle ilişkili enfeksiyonların en yaygın etkenlerindendir ve biyofilm oluşturma yetenekleri bu enfeksiyonların tedavisini zorlaştıran önemli bir virülans faktörüdür. Bu çalışmada, kan kateteri örneklerinden izole edilen Staphylococcus suşlarının antibiyotik direnç profilleri ile biyofilm oluşturma kapasiteleri in vitro olarak değerlendirildi. Toplam 65 izolatın antibiyotik duyarlılığı VITEK-2 otomatik sistemi ve sıvı mikrodilüsyon yöntemi ile belirlendi. İzolatların oluşturduğu biyofilm kütle miktarı kristal viyole boyama yöntemiyle değerlendirildi ve elde edilen optik dansite (OD) değerlerine göre sınıflandırıldı. İzolatların %54.8'inin biyofilm pozitif (BP) olduğu tespit edildi. BP suşlar, biyofilm negatif (BN) suşlara göre çoğu antibiyotiğe daha dirençli bulundu, bu fark siprofloksasin ve tetrasiklin için istatistiksel olarak anlamlı idi (p

Background and Objectives: The purpose of this systematic review and meta-analysis is to assess the patient’s quality of life, as well as the safety and effectiveness of different probiotic strains in treating IBS symptoms such as IBS-C, IBS-D, IBS-M, and IBS-U. Additionally, we contrast the side effects of probiotics that are single-strain and multi-strain. Materials and Methods: PRISMA criteria were followed in the conduct and reporting of this study. The protocol for this review (CRD420251120965) was entered into PROSPERO. RCTs comparing probiotic usage to placebo or usual therapy in adult IBS patients were found using four online databases: PubMed, Google Scholar, Ovid Medline, and the Cochrane Library. Review Manager was used for data synthesis and statistical analysis. Results: After screening 660 records, 16 randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials with 2823 IBS patients were included. Probiotics significantly reduced intestinal discomfort overall (MD: −93.9; 95% CI −133.1 to −54.7; p &lt; 0.00001) and the IBS-Severity Scoring System. Probiotics showed a clinically significant overall improvement (OR 1.71; 95% CI 1.26–2.33; p = 0.0006) when compared to a placebo. They were also well tolerated and did not increase adverse events. Conclusions: According to 16 RCTs, probiotics greatly lessen overall IBS symptoms, which enhances the quality of life and has global therapeutic implications. The findings support the use of probiotics as an effective and safe supplemental treatment for IBS patients.

China's rapid urbanization has spawned extensive informal settlements, where millions of migrant families live in overcrowded, underserved areas. These environments, characterized by inadequate housing, poor sanitation, unsafe conditions, and limited healthcare access, significantly impede the utilization of maternal healthcare, specifically Antenatal (ANC) and Postnatal Care (PNC). This study examines how built environment characteristics influence ANC and PNC use among women in these settlements across four major Chinese cities. A cross-sectional study collected data from 800 women who had given birth in the previous two years. Built environment elements were measured via subjective assessments and objective indicators, including GPS-based distance to the nearest health facility. Associations were analyzed using multivariate logistic and negative binomial regression models. Findings identify distance to health facilities, housing quality, neighborhood safety, walkability, sanitation, and transport access as critical determinants. Women in disadvantaged settings were less likely to receive adequate ANC or timely PNC. Socio-economic factors -hukou status, education, income, and health insurance- further shaped utilization patterns. The results underscore the necessity of integrating maternal health strategies into urban planning. Improving transport connectivity, upgrading informal settlements, and reducing institutional barriers for migrants are vital to enhancing maternal health and fostering equity in China's rapidly urbanizing landscape.

Latar Belakang: Penyakit jantung merupakan penyebab utama kematian global yang tidak hanya berdampak fisik, tetapi juga memicu kecemasan yang dipengaruhi oleh usia, jenis kelamin, pendidikan, dan status pekerjaan pasien. Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk menganalisis pengaruh karakteristik responden terhadap kecemasan.Metode: Penelitian ini menggunakan jenis penelitian korelasi dengan pendekatan cross sectional, yang berlokasi di RS Sayang Cianjur. Sampel dalam penelitian ini adalah 45 pasien jantung dengan teknik purposive sampling, penelitian ini menggunakan instrumen Zung Self-Rating Anxiety Scale (SAS), dengan analisis data meliputi chi-square dan logistic regression.Hasil: Hasil analisis chi-square menunjukkan bahwa variabel usia, jenis kelamin, pendidikan dan pekerjaan memiliki hubungan yang signifikan dengan kecemasan ($p &lt; 0,05$). Hasil regresi logistik menunjukkan bahwa usia, pendidikan, dan pekerjaan secara bersamaan berpengaruh pada kecemasan, dengan pendidikan sebagai faktor yang paling dominan ($OR = 10,61$).Kesimpulan: Disimpulkan bahwa usia, pendidikan, dan pekerjaan memiliki efek yang signifikan pada tingkat kecemasan pada pasien penyakit jantung. Rekomendasi untuk penelitian lebih lanjut adalah untuk mengeksplorasi efektivitas intervensi Terapi Perilaku Kognitif (CBT) sebagai upaya mengurangi kecemasan pada pasien jantung

Introduction: Insulin, when applied as a local dressing, stimulates the growth and development of keratinocytes, endothelial cells, and fibroblasts, which aid in proliferation and tissue healing. Phenytoin, when used as a local dressing, has been extensively studied due to its positive effects on ulcer healing. These effects include increased fibroblast proliferation, collagen deposition, neovascularisation, enhanced granulation tissue formation, decreased collagenase activity, and reduced bacterial contamination. Aim: To compare the efficacy of topical insulin with topical phenytoin in Diabetic Foot Ulcers (DFUs). Materials and Methods: This prospective observational study was conducted in the Department of Surgery, at Mamata Medical College, Khammam, Telangana, India from August 2022 to July 2024. It included 64 cases of DFU (32 in each group), randomised by the envelope method. Group A: Topical insulin dressing (0.5 mL insulin with 5 mL normal saline). Group B: Topical phenytoin dressing (100 mg in 5 mL normal saline). Outcomes were measured in terms of wound size and percentage of wound contraction on days 7, 14, and 21, compared to Day 1 of the study. An unpaired t-test was used for the analysis of continuous data, while Pearson’s Chi-square test was used for the analysis of categorical data. Statistical analysis was performed using Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) version 24.0. Results: The mean age of subjects in Group A was 49.72±12.28 years, and in Group B, it was 52.28±12.79 years. The male-tofemale ratio was 2.5:1 in Group A and 1.285:1 in Group B. The mean ulcer size for Group A on Day 1 was 17.88±3.148 cm², and for Group B, it was 17.3±3.47 cm², with a p-value &gt; 0.05. The mean reduction in ulcer size for the topical insulin group was 2.6 cm², while for the topical phenytoin group, it was 6.33 cm² (p-value &lt;0.0001). The percentage of reduction in mean ulcer size was greater in the topical phenytoin group (36.41%) compared to the topical insulin group (14.5%), with a p-value &lt; 0.0001. The mean duration for complete epithelialisation of the ulcer, or when the ulcer bed was ready for split skin grafting, was 26.75 days in the topical insulin group and 20.8 days in the topical phenytoin group (p-value&lt;0.0001). A total of 27 (84.375%) and 30 (93.75%) cases in the topical insulin group and the topical phenytoin group, respectively, underwent split skin grafting. Five patients in the topical insulin group and two patients in the topical phenytoin group achieved complete healing of the ulcer by secondary intention. Conclusion: Topical phenytoin was found to be relatively more effective than topical insulin in enhancing wound healing in terms of percentage reduction in ulcer size and duration for complete epithelialisation.

Introduction: Undifferentiated and dedifferentiated ovarian carcinomas are rare, aggressive neoplasms. While the dedifferentiated component may exhibit neuroendocrine differentiation, this is typically limited to less than 10% of the tumor. Case Report: We report a unique case of a 73-year-old woman with a high-grade ovarian adenocarcinoma containing a morphologically distinct, diffusely neuroendocrine-rich component. Histologically, the tumor demonstrated two distinct patterns: a well-differentiated yet cytologically high-grade adenocarcinoma adjacent to sheets of monotonous, largely dyscohesive high-grade tumor cells with diffuse neuroendocrine marker expression. The dual morphology raised consideration of a mixed adenocarcinoma–neuroendocrine carcinoma as part of the diagnostic differential. Conclusion: This case describes an uncommon ovarian carcinoma that shows more than 10% diffuse neuroendocrine differentiation which is not typically encountered in dedifferentiated ovarian carcinomas. The combination of high-grade adenocarcinoma with a neuroendocrine-rich component suggests a mixed adenocarcinoma–neuroendocrine carcinoma, a pattern that, to our knowledge, has not been previously documented in the ovary. These observations emphasize the importance of maintaining a broad differential diagnosis when evaluating ovarian carcinomas with prominent neuroendocrine features.

Diabetic retinopathy (DR) is one of the most common and vision-threatening complications of diabetes, affecting approximately one-third of patients. Systemic management of diabetes plays a crucial role in delaying the onset and progression of DR. Intensive glycemic control, as demonstrated in the DCCT (Diabetes Control and Complications Trial) and the UKPDS (United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study), significantly reduces long-term risk of retinopathy. However, rapid glucose lowering, particularly in patients with preexisting DR, may lead to an early worsening phenomenon. This transient deterioration is thought to be related to hypoglycemia, hemodynamic changes, and synergistic effects of insulin and vascular endothelial growth factor. In addition to glucose control, strict management of blood pressure and lipid profiles, including use of fenofibrate, further reduces the risk of progression. The role of glucagonlike peptide-1 receptor agonists in DR remains controversial, with early signals of worsening observed in SUSTAIN-6 but not consistently demonstrated in meta-analyses. Current evidence emphasizes the long-term benefits of early intensive systemic management, despite short-term risks. A patient-specific multifactorial management approach effectively reduces the risk of onset and progression of DR.

Abstract Monkeypox is a zoonosis caused by the monkeypox virus. In 2022, the World Health Organization declared monkeypox a Public Health Emergency of International Concern due to its unprecedented global spread. Since June 2023, several new cases have re-emerged in mainland China, underscoring the ongoing transmission risk. Our three cases, confirmed by real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction with dermoscopic and histopathological findings supporting diagnosis, exhibited atypical symptoms consistent with skin contact-mediated transmission. We propose that, in some patients, lesions may initially develop at the site of contact without preceding systemic symptoms and later disseminate to other body regions.

Traumatic cataract typically results from blunt or penetrating ocular injuries. However, cataract formation due to reflexive act of self-defense is exceptionally rare. We present the case of a 16-year-old boy who sustained trauma to his left eye while shielding himself during an altercation. The injury led to rupture of the anterior lens capsule and dense cataract formation. His best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was counting fingers in the affected eye. Examination revealed circumciliary congestion, a corneal laceration, a Grade 4 anterior chamber reaction, a ruptured anterior lens capsule, and a white, opacified lens. Lens aspiration with in-the-bag intraocular lens (IOL) implantation was performed. Postoperatively, the patient regained 6/6 visual acuity, which remained stable over monthly follow-ups. This case underscores the importance of prompt diagnosis, timely surgical intervention, and patient education in preventing vision loss due to trauma.

ABSTRACT Background SRP72 ‐associated hereditary bone marrow failure syndrome type 1 (BMFS1) has recently been described and only six families have been reported so far. BMFS1 is an autosomal dominant condition characterized by early‐onset aplastic anemia or pancytopenia in some patients and adult‐onset myelodysplasia in others. This paper presents the clinical and genetic characteristics of a rare case of hereditary bone marrow failure syndrome 1 (BMFS1) and explores its pathogenesis. Methods Blood samples and clinical data were collected from the proband and his biological parents. Next‐generation sequencing (NGS) was employed to sequence the genes associated with the proband, and the identified variants were subsequently confirmed via Sanger sequencing. Additionally, minigene splicing assays were conducted to assess the functional alterations of SRP72 . Results A new splicing variant, c.1502+1G&gt;A, was identified in the SRP72 gene through gene sequencing, and this finding was confirmed by Sanger sequencing. Neither parent carried this mutation. Minigene splicing assays revealed an insertion of two bases (AG) at the mRNA level (r.1503‐2_1503‐1insAG), potentially resulting in a premature stop codon (p.Leu502ValfsTer14). According to ACMG guidelines, the variant is classified as “Likely pathogenic”. The c.1502+1G&gt;A mutation in SRP72 is implicated as the potential cause of BMFS1 in this child. Conclusions Our study identified a novel classical splicing mutation, marking the first report of BMFS1 in China. This case broadens the spectrum of pathogenic variants associated with the SRP72 gene and expands our understanding of its phenotypic manifestations. It also serves as a typical example for early diagnosis and appropriate treatment of BMFS1.

The early administration of r-SAK thrombolysis before primary PCI significantly improves long-term LV and LA function in STEMI patients, suggesting a potential strategy for enhancing cardiac recovery.

Ameloblastic carcinoma (AC) is a rare, aggressive cancer of the jaw exhibiting both benign and malignant features. It is more common in males and usually affects the mandible, presenting as a rapidly progressing, painful or painless swelling with ulceration and bone destruction. This review aims to compile current knowledge on AC, emphasizing the importance of follow-up and standardized reporting. It addresses its prevalence, clinical presentation, diagnostic approaches, treatment options, long-term outcomes and existing challenges, and suggests directions for future research and management strategies. We conducted a literature search on databases including PubMed, Scopus, and Web of Science from database inception to July 2025. The search included terms such as “ameloblastic carcinoma,” “jaw tumors,” and “oral malignancies.” Articles written in English, including case reports, reviews, and original studies, were reviewed. AC accounts for 1–3% of jaw tumors. It affects men more and often occurs in people in their 5 th –6 th decades of life, mainly in the mandible. Diagnosis is based on signs, imaging, tissue samples, and laboratory tests such as Ki-67, p53, and SOX2. Surgical resection with wide margins is the primary treatment. Chemotherapy and radiotherapy may be needed if the tumor spreads. The 5-year survival is between 60% and 70%, but this drops if the cancer occurs in the upper jaw. AC is difficult to manage because it is rare and can act unpredictably. We need more studies, consistent reporting, and collaboration between medical centers to improve the understanding and treatment of this disease.

O presente estudo avaliou a qualidade dos serviços prestados em um Centro de Especialidades Odontológicas (CEO), considerando aspectos físicos, ambientais, de biossegurança e eficácia dos atendimentos. As instalações apresentaram-se adequadas, com equipamentos suficientes e insumos de biossegurança de boa qualidade, apesar de problemas de manutenção. O perfil dos usuários indicou predominância de mulheres (38,9 anos, maioria residente na zona urbana), com uma grande limitação na coleta de informações sobre saúde geral. A análise do tempo de espera revelou uma média superior ao considerado ideal, refletindo dificuldades estruturais e organizacionais. Além disso, o estudo identificou falhas nos registros dos prontuários, especialmente na ausência de fichas de encaminhamento e informações sobre o contra referenciamento, comprometendo a integralidade do atendimento. As especialidades mais procuradas foram cirurgia e periodontia, com um nível crítico de completude nos prontuários, que afeta a continuidade do tratamento e a qualidade dos serviços. Esses achados destacam a importância de aprimorar a documentação clínica, a integração entre atenção básica e especializada, e a eficiência no contra referenciamento para garantir a integralidade do cuidado.

Purpose: Schizophrenia is a challenging health condition characterized by a wide range of symptoms and varying responses to treatment. Studies on how genes affect drug responses have been promising. In particular, genes involved in the dopamine system of the brain, such as dopamine receptor D1 (&lt;i&gt;DRD1&lt;/i&gt;), dopamine receptor D2 (&lt;i&gt;DRD2&lt;/i&gt;), dopamine receptor D3 (&lt;i&gt;DRD3&lt;/i&gt;), and catechol-O-methyltransferase (&lt;i&gt;COMT&lt;/i&gt;) appear to play key roles in the response of patients to antipsychotic medications. This review examined studies on specific genes involved in the dopaminergic system, which plays a key role in how antipsychotic drugs work.Methods: The PubMed, Scopus, Web of Science, and Google Scholar databases were searched, following Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines, and the protocol was registered with PROSPERO (CRD420251168294). Eligible studies included patients diagnosed with schizophrenia who were treated with antipsychotics and had dopaminergic gene variant data.Results: Of 73 screened articles, 26 met the inclusion criteria. Among the gene variants studied, &lt;i&gt;COMT&lt;/i&gt; rs4680 and &lt;i&gt;DRD2&lt;/i&gt; rs1800497 showed consistent links to treatment responses, particularly in reducing symptom severity as measured by the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) and Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS) scores. The relationship between genetic variants and clinical outcomes was statistically significant (P=0.007), whereas the study design showed no such association (P=0.416). Forest plots revealed varied effect sizes across gene families, with &lt;i&gt;COMT&lt;/i&gt; and &lt;i&gt;DRD2&lt;/i&gt; generally showing odds ratios &gt;1.0, indicating a favorable impact on treatment.Conclusion: Our findings suggest that certain dopaminergic gene variants, especially &lt;i&gt;COMT&lt;/i&gt; rs4680 and &lt;i&gt;DRD2&lt;/i&gt; rs1800497, may serve as valuable markers for predicting the response of patients with schizophrenia to antipsychotic therapy.

In the last decades mental health services experienced dramatic changes with a sharp decrease of psychiatric hospital beds and the integration of psychiatric inpatient care into medical care. In addition, psychiatric outpatient services have been developed and expanded. While some experts suggest to treat even very acute patients as outpatients, others recommend inpatient treatment for them. While numerous disadvantages of psychiatric hospital treatment have been eliminated, others continue to burden mentally ill persons. We assume that most of these disadvantages can be eliminated resulting in a better balance between in- and outpatient care. Despite the integration of psychiatric inpatient services into general hospitals high proportions of mentally ill persons suffer from comorbid physical diseases resulting in increased mortality. Better collaboration between specialists in medicine and psychiatrist is needed. New collaborative models based on scientific evidence can support this. All health professionals need a comprehensive education of this somatic-psychiatric comorbidity. Recent studies have shown that lifestyle interventions can prevent some somatic comorbid illness. Until now implementation of these preventive measures is rare, requiring a massive extended implementation in the next years. Overall, this will need sophisticated research, new health care strategies and adequate resources.

Phacoemulsification is the most preferred method in both dogs and cats due to its minimal invasiveness and high success rate. However, alternative techniques such as ECCE and ICCE are also used for specific indications. Surgical success rates exceed 80% in dogs, while in cats, positive results exceeding 90% have been reported, especially in congenital and juvenile cases. The most common postoperative complications include posterior capsule opacification, glaucoma, retinal detachment, and lens-induced uveitis. In conclusion, cataract surgery ensures the successful restoration of visual function with appropriate patient selection and effective postoperative care. This review comprehensively addresses the surgical treatment of cataracts in dogs and cats, aiming to provide up-to-date literature-based information on the techniques used, success rates, and potential complications.

Purpose: This study aims to examine the effects of hamstring tightness on cervical joint range of motion (CROM), neck disability, and foot posture and assess the impact of a four-week hamstring stretching program. Methods: This controlled, cross-sectional, and interventional study included 108 participants (study group: n=58, control group: n=50, age 18-25 years). Hamstring flexibility was assessed using the active knee extension test, cervical function with a CROM device, neck disability with the neck disability index (NDI), and foot posture with the navicular drop test. The study group performed hamstring stretching exercises for four weeks (3 sessions/week). Results: Baseline measurements showed that the study group had lower cervical flexion (p=0.004), right (p<0.001) and left (p<0.001) lateral flexion, and right rotation (p=0.003) compared to controls. Neck disability was higher in the study group (p<0.001), and navicular drop was greater (p=0.025 right, p=0.012 left). After the intervention, CROM significantly improved (p<0.05 for all movements), and NDI scores decreased (p<0.001), but navicular drop showed no significant change (p>0.05). Conclusion: Hamstring tightness negatively affects CROM, neck disability, and foot posture, supporting myofascial connectivity. The four-week stretching program improved cervical mobility and reduced neck disability, highlighting its therapeutic potential. However, additional interventions may be needed to modify foot posture. Future studies should explore long-term effects and underlying biomechanical mechanisms.

Background: Continuity of Care (CoC) is a midwifery care approach emphasizing continuous and interpersonal relationships between health providers and women throughout pregnancy, childbirth, postpartum, and family planning periods. Objective: This study aimed to analyze the impact of CoC implementation by midwifery students on women’s trust in health services. Methods: The research involved 30 women who received CoC care from students of the Midwifery Professional Program, Faculty of Medicine, Andalas University. Data were collected through observation of CoC implementation and a validated trust questionnaire covering four dimensions: students’ competence, interaction comfort, confidentiality, and readiness to receive care. Results: Statistical analysis using a paired t-test showed a significant increase in women’s trust scores after receiving CoC (mean score increased from 3.2 to 4.4; p &lt; 0.05). Linear regression analysis indicated that the quality of CoC implementation significantly influenced women’s trust levels (R² = 0.52). Conclusion: These findings demonstrate that CoC provided by midwifery students not only enhances the quality of care but also strengthens the trust relationship between women and health providers. The results are expected to contribute to the development of midwifery education curricula emphasizing continuity of care and empathy in clinical practice.

Background Pacific Islanders experience significant health disparities. One contributing aspect to these disparities is the lack of racial concordance as Pacific Islanders are underrepresented in the U.S. physician work force. Several factors contribute to this underrepresentation including lack of support systems for Pacific Islander premed and medical students. Pasifikas in Medicine (PiM) is a recently established national student organization founded to provide support for Pacific Islander premed students, medical students, residents, fellows and attending physicians. This study seeks to understand the impact of PiM on medical student experiences. Methods An anonymous survey was distributed to the PiM listserv and to Diversity, Equity and Inclusion offices of allopathic and osteopathic medical schools across the U.S. The survey included seven questions for demographic data, ten 5-point ordinal questions to evaluate the impact of PiM on medical student experiences, and three free text questions. Results A total of 34 individuals participated in the study with 21 individuals completing the evaluative portion of the survey. Of 28 who responded, 27 (96.4%) were the first in their family to attend medical school, and 25 (89.2%), planned to serve Pacific Islander patient populations in their medical career. For the 10 evaluative questions, 7 scored ≥ 4.0 of of 5.0. Identifying Mentors, Faculty Networking, and Research Opportunities scored less well. Qualitative data was favorable of PiM and demonstrated significant camaraderie, community, and connection to other Pacific Islander physicians and medical students. Conclusion Pasifikas in Medicine fills an unmet need by creating a space dedicated to addressing the challenges unique to Pacific Islander students, separate from other minority groups. Improvements to PiM should begin with creating more mentorship opportunities, faculty networking and research opportunities. Additionally, increasing PiM presence nationally and locally within medical schools could further strengthen Pacific Islander medical student experience.

Objective: This study aims to assess demographic and clinical characteristics of the donor and recipient in kidney transplantation. Materials and Methods: The population was composed of kidney transplant recipients and donors who applied to an organ transplant centre in Turkey. A total of 71 people were reached. The researcher prepared the questionnaire used in the study. The form included information on whether or not the participant was a recipient or donor, living or cadaveric, some socio-demographic characteristics, whether or not the participant was treated with immunosuppressive therapy before transplantation, whether or not the participant was undergoing dialysis, and follow-up findings after transplantation (Blood Urea Nitrogen (BUN) /creatinine, eGFR, chronic kidney disease stage, haemoglobin/ white blood cell/platelet). Results: The mean age of the participants was 37.42± 15.41. 50.7% of the participants were recipients, and 49.3% of them were donors. A great majority (82.9%) of those who were organ donors were married (p=0.007) when looking at “marital status”, one of the variables that made a difference. A great majority of the participants (91.7%) were transplant recipients who did not smoke (p=0.000). A moderate positive correlation was found between BUN values and creatinine values in patients before transplantation. Conclusions: The results of this study are compatible with the literature in terms of both demographic and clinical characteristics of the donor and recipient

Background/Objectives: Female tubal factor infertility is a major clinical challenge. While surgical repair of the fallopian tubes remains the traditional standard, biological fibrin sealants have been proposed to reduce tissue trauma and improve reproductive outcomes. Methods: We conducted database searches of PubMed/MEDLINE, EMBASE and Google Scholar until 31 August 2025, using the keywords “tubal anastomosis”, “tubal reanastomosis,” “tubal reanastomosis”, “uterine horn anastomosis”, “fibrin glue”, “fibrin sealant”, “biological sealant”, “tissue adhesive”, “rabbit”, “rat” and “sterilization reversal.” Reference lists of retrieved articles have been examined to find studies which tested end-to-end tubal (or small-animal uterine horn) anastomosis through biological adhesives with or without additional components to evaluate patency success, fertility results and adhesion formation. Results: Thirteen studies met the inclusion criteria (eleven animal; two human). Rat and rabbit models demonstrated that fibrin sealants with intraluminal splints and one-to-two anchoring sutures produced results comparable to microsutures for patency (tubal patency rates of 75–100%) and pregnancy success (pregnancy rates of 60–83%) while reducing surgical time and decreasing peritubal adhesions. The success rates of the procedures depended on the anastomosis locations. Isthmic–isthmic anastomosis produced better results than ampullary repairs which tended to fail or develop stenosis. Fibrin sealant-only repairs without splinting were associated with lower patency (almost 60%) despite acceptable histologic healing. Human data showed similar pregnancy rates (intrauterine pregnancy in about 40–50% of women) and tubal patency but no consistent decrease in adhesions. Ectopic pregnancy rates ranged from 9 to 11%. Conclusions: Fibrin sealants are useful adjuncts to microsurgical tubal repair, but they should not replace the basic repair procedures. The effectiveness of this procedure is dependent on three critical factors: precise segment alignment, proper use of splints and stents, and selection of segments with comparable caliber. In a personalized-medicine framework, fibrin-assisted reanastomosis may offer a tailored option for selected women who desire natural pregnancy. Modern standardized research is required to define indications and analyze how the adaptation of fibrin sealants in minimally invasive procedures affect reproductive outcomes, ectopic pregnancy rates, and adhesion development.

Background/Objectives: Since 1988, the IARC has classified alcohol as a type 1 carcinogen, causally linked to seven types of cancer (oral cavity, pharynx, larynx, esophagus, colorectum, liver and breast carcinomas). Several agencies, such as the WHO and the IARC, hold that there is a direct monotonic association between any gram of alcohol consumed and the risk of cancer, regardless of the drinking pattern. On the other hand, an expanding body of evidence indicates that drinking pattern may substantially modify the effect of alcohol consumption. The Mediterranean alcohol-drinking pattern (MADP) includes different aspects of alcohol consumption, such as preference for red wine, moderate alcohol consumption with meals, spreading consumption over the week and avoiding binge drinking. Conformity to this pattern has shown inverse associations with all-cause mortality, cardiovascular disease and diabetes. However, its relationship with cancer incidence has not been studied yet. Our objective was to assess how alcohol consumption patterns, with particular emphasis on the MADP, relate to the incidence of the seven alcohol-related cancers. This information is needed to support cancer prevention recommendations that may go beyond the amount of alcohol consumed to also include the drinking pattern. Methods: We prospectively followed 19,541 participants in the SUN (“Seguimiento Universidad de Navarra”) cohort for a median of 13.8 years. We classified participants into four groups, namely, abstainers and three further groups according to their adherence to the MADP score (low, moderate and high). Results: A substantial reduction in the risk of alcohol-related cancer incidence was observed only in men for high versus low adherence to the MADP, with an adjusted hazard ratio (HR) of 0.44 (95% confidence intervals (CIs) (0.21–0.92)). The category of moderate adherence to the MADP showed a lower risk of cancer incidence with a tendency towards statistical significance (HR = 0.56, 95% CI, 0.30–1.06). For women, no result reached statistical significance. Conclusions: Based on the available evidence, separate messages by sex should be delivered. In men, the association between alcohol and cancer goes beyond the amount of alcohol consumed, and a Mediterranean drinking pattern may be beneficial even for alcohol-related cancers. Men should, therefore, receive an additional message: among alcohol consumers, greater adherence to the MADP may help lower their risk of developing alcohol-related cancers. No benefit is supported for the MADP against alcohol-related cancers in women.

Objective: This brief report aims to summarize our outpatient child psychiatry clinic’s experience regarding extended release (ER) guanfacine use in the help-seeking Turkish Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) children and adolescents. Methods: Data were gathered through a retrospective review of patient records from our database, focusing on children and adolescents diagnosed with ADHD who had been prescribed ER guanfacine. Results: The clinical data of 23 patients (18 males and 5 females) aged 8 to 17 years were analyzed, focusing on their demographic characteristics, developmental assessments, comorbid psychiatric diagnoses, initial psychiatric complaints, history of previous treatments, initial treatment responses and side effects, indications for initiating or augmenting treatment with guanfacine, therapeutic outcomes, and adverse effects associated with guanfacine, and the reasons for discontinuation when applicable. Conclusion: This preliminary report suggests that guanfacine is well-tolerated, safe, and effective in alleviating ADHD-related symptoms, as well as reducing irritability, oppositional defiance, aggressive behaviors, and tics in children with ADHD comorbid multiple neurodevelopmental disorders.

Purpose This study aimed to investigate the characteristics of macular edema observed by fundus autofluorescence (FAF) and to analyze noninvasive indicators of ischemia in retinal vein occlusion (RVO) through FAF or optical coherence tomography (OCT). We specifically report a newly recognized FAF–OCT mismatch in ischemic RVO, in which CME is not detectable on FAF. Methods This study included 74 participants. 49 eyes of 49 patients with RVO and 25 healthy control eyes were included in the study. All patients underwent a complete ophthalmologic examination and were evaluated with FAF, fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA), and OCT. The optical intensities of the inner and outer retinal layers were measured using ImageJ software. Results Of 49 eyes in RVO patients, FAF imaging showed typical Cystoid macular edema (CME) with hyperautofluorescence in non-ischemic RVO patients (69.57%) and in ischemic RVO patients (26.92%, p = 0.029, p &amp;lt; 0.05). Disorganization of retinal inner layers (DRIL) was observed in 13 eyes in the non-ischemic RVO group and 23 eyes in the ischemic RVO group. ( χ 2 = 6.387, p = 0.012, p &amp;lt; 0.05) The prominent middle-limiting membrane (p-MLM) sign was found in 5 eyes in the non-ischemic RVO group and 15 eyes in the ischemic RVO group. ( χ 2 = 6.530, p = 0.011, p &amp;lt; 0.05) The mean optical intensity of the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) layer, ellipsoid, and interdigitation zones in the ischemic RVO group was 109.78 ± 19.327, which was significantly lower compared to the non-ischemic RVO group (172.31 ± 30.527, p = 0.001, p &amp;lt; 0.01). Conclusion CME in patients with ischemic RVO is less easily detectable on FAF compared to patients with non-ischemic RVO. This lack of correspondence may provide insight into the type of RVO. We conclude that the presence of DRIL, a p-MLM sign, impairment of the integrity of the external limiting membrane (ELM), and decreased optical intensity or integrity of the ellipsoid zone and RPE can serve as effective indicators of ischemia in RVO patients.

This study aimed to determine the femoral inclination angle parameters of the proximal femur and acetabulum in both healthy and hip dysplasia-affected Aksaray Malaklı dogs. This data contributes to understanding the breed’s hip morphology and supports treatment planning for hip dysplasia. The study included 15 Aksaray Malaklı dogs (9 females, 6 males), radiographed in a ventrodorsal (V/D) view at 4, 8, and 12 months of age. Hip dysplasia susceptibility was evaluated using the Fédération Cynologique Internationale (FCI) scoring system, and femoral inclination angles were measured. According to FCI scoring, hip dysplasia was detected in 6.6% of dogs at 4 months, 26.6% at 8 months, and 66.6% at 12 months. A progressive increase in femoral inclination angles was also observed: 26.6% at 4 months, 33.3% at 8 months, and 40% at 12 months. After analyzing the femoral inclination indices for left and right hip joints, statistical results showed no significant difference (p&gt;0.05) between sides. It was emphasized that the femoral inclination angle alone is not a sufficient parameter to assess hip dysplasia, as it may lead to misleading conclusions. Although positive statistical changes were observed, an increase in the femoral inclination angle cannot always be correlated with the presence or severity of hip dysplasia. Additionally, orthopedic conditions such as femoral torsion, coxa vara, coxa valga, and arthritis may also be present alongside hip dysplasia.

ABSTRACT Evidence‐based informed consent practices—such as writing in plain language, formatting for readability, and assessing understanding using validated instruments—are underutilized in research practice. Yet the Common Rule does not specifically require the use of evidence‐based informed consent practices. In this paper, we explore the wisdom of mandating evidence‐based informed consent practices either at the institutional or federal level. In the first part, we share findings from a series of six focus groups with leaders of institutional review boards (IRBs) about mandating evidence‐based informed consent practice. In general, IRB leaders had positive views toward plain language and optimal document formatting but were skeptical about validated assessments of participant comprehension of consent information. They generally opposed federal and institutional mandates, preferring an educational approach to promoting evidence‐based informed consent practices. In the second part of the paper, we draw upon data from several of our studies and the literature to defend the conclusion that IRBs should experiment with mandates for evidence‐based informed consent practices. We accept that federal regulations may be insufficiently flexible. However, educational efforts alone have not sufficed and are not likely to increase adoption of evidence‐based informed consent practices. We believe institutional mandates will not actually lead to greater delays in review of research protocols or investigator burden if rolled out with sufficient guidance and resources, which are readily available.

Abstract Background Dual‐contrast imaging of iodine and bismuth has shown promise in previous phantom and animal studies utilizing spectral CT. However, these studies often employed Pepto‐Bismol containing bismuth subsalicylate with dosages exceeding the recommended limits for human consumption, limiting their clinical applicability. Purpose The purpose of this study was to improve iodine–bismuth dual‐contrast imaging on a clinical photon‐counting CT (PCCT) system using a noise‐optimized virtual monoenergetic imaging (VMI) approach. Methods Four bismuth samples (0.6, 1.3, 2.5, and 5.1 mg/mL) and three iodine rods (1.0, 2.0, and 5.0 mg/mL) were inserted into a multi‐energy CT phantom and scanned on a PCCT system at 140 kV. VMIs were generated from 40 to 190 keV in 10 keV increments. Iodine and bismuth maps were computed for all possible keV pairs using a generic image‐based three‐material decomposition method and compared with maps generated from the original low‐/high‐energy PCCT images. Mass concentrations, noise levels, and individual as well as joint root‐mean‐square error (RMSE) for iodine and bismuth were measured to determine the optimal keV pair. The contrast‐to‐noise ratios (CNRs) of low concentration samples (bismuth: 0.6 and 1.3 mg/mL; iodine: 1.0 mg/mL) were calculated at the optimal keV pair and compared to the values determined with the original PCCT images. In an IRB‐approved feasibility study, a research patient was administered two doses of Pepto‐Bismol prior to a routine abdomen‐pelvis CT scan. Material decomposition was performed using both the original low‐/high‐energy images and the optimal VMI pair identified in the phantom study. Bismuth signals in the stomach and proximal small bowel were assessed qualitatively and quantitatively. Results The VMI pair of 110 and 190 keV was determined to be optimal, achieving the lowest joint RMSE of 0.49 mg/mL, compared to 1.42 mg/mL for the original low‐/high‐energy pair. It also yielded the highest CNR, representing a 190–318% improvement over the original low/high‐energy decomposition. Qualitatively, both phantom and patient studies demonstrated improved iodine–bismuth separation and reduced noise using the optimized VMI pair. Conclusions These findings suggest that noise‐optimized VMI selection can enhance dual‐contrast material decomposition performance on clinical PCCT, supporting its potential for translation into gastrointestinal imaging applications.

Duygusal açlık, çeşitli duygulara tepki olarak ani bir açlık hissi olarak tanımlanmaktadır. Yemek zamanı geldiğinde, fiziksel olarak aç hissettiğinde ya da fiziksel açlık belirtileri gösterdiğinde değil, insanların yalnızca hissettiği duygulardan kaynaklanan bir yeme davranışıdır. Fiziksel açlık belirtileri olmaksızın kişinin kendini ödüllendirme isteği, yemek yeme isteği ve yemek yeme zevki olarak ortaya çıkan psikolojik belirtiler hedonik açlık olarak tanımlanmaktadır. Beynin belirli bölgelerinden lezzetli yiyeceklere verilen sinirsel ve algısal tepkiler arttığında, beynin obeziteye ve uyumsuz yeme davranışına (örneğin tıkınırcasına yeme, sağlıksız beslenme, aç kalmadan yemek yeme) yol açar. Bu sebeple hedonik açlık, yeme ve kilo sorunlarının temel nedeni olarak görülüyor. Hedonik açlık, dünya çapında obezitenin hızla ilerlemesinde önemli bir faktör kabul edilmektedir. Obezite ile hedonik açlık arasında anlamlı bir ilişki olduğunu gösteren birden fazla araştırma bulunmaktadır. Tip 2 diyabetli hastaların, aç olmasalar bile yemek yemeye yönelik güçlü bir istek hissetmeleri nedeniyle sıklıkla tıkınırcasına yeme davranışı sergilemeleri, bu hastaların yemek isteme ve yeme konusunda sorun yaşadıklarını göstermektedir. Hedonik açlık, yüksek yağ ve/veya rafine karbonhidrat içeren gıdalara yönelik güçlü istek nedeniyle glisemik kontrolü kötüleştirebileceğinden, hedonik açlığın azaltılması diyabet ve obezitenin kontrolünde faydalı olabilir.

Encyklika Jana Pawła II Evangelium vitae jest przede wszystkim orędziem o wartości i nienaruszalności życia ludzkiego. Celem pracy jest znalezienie danych o wartości i znaczeniu życia także innych istot żywych, poza człowiekiem, o czym sugeruje zapis 42. punktu Ewangelii życia. W zastosowanych metodach tych poszukiwań dominuje analiza tekstów biblijnych, teologicznych i faktów przyrodniczych, aby stwierdzić, że współudział człowieka w panowaniu Boga nad całym żywym stworzeniem i moralna odpowiedzialność człowieka za życie wszystkich istot żywych jest wystarczającą racją do uznania wartości i znaczenia życia pozaludzkiego. Wniosek o najwyższej wadze nadprzyrodzonej jest taki, że Dobra Nowina o życiu wszystkich istot żywych otwiera również nową perspektywę: udział w dziele odkupienia, wolności i chwały dzieci Bożych.

ABSTRACT We describe the case of a 38‐year‐old male with a long history of paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia (PSVT) who was found to have typical slow–fast atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia (AVNRT) and nodoventricular reentrant tachycardia (NVRT). During an electrophysiology study, a wide complex tachycardia with left bundle branch block (LBBB) morphology with V2 transition was induced, exhibiting ventriculo‐atrial (VA) dissociation and characteristics suggesting an AV node–ventricle reentrant circuit. Careful mapping and pacing maneuvers supported the diagnosis of a nodoventricular reentrant tachycardia (NVRT) with insertion site in the LV septum by using high‐density mapping coexisting with typical AVNRT. The patient was successfully treated with radiofrequency ablation at the slow pathway region, eliminating both arrhythmias. This case highlights the evidence of unusual NV pathway with LV insertion and importance of differentiating AVNRT with aberrancy or concomitant ventricular tachycardia (VT) from an accessory pathway‐mediated reentrant tachycardia.

Background: Impulsivity is the tendency to act prematurely without foresight. Previous studies suggest that impulsivity is present in patients of bipolar affective disorder (BPAD) and major depressive disorder during the euthymic period as a trait-like characteristics. Aims and Objectives: The aim of this study was to measure impulsivity of euthymic BPAD and major depressive disorder (MDD) patients and to compare it with healthy controls (HC). Materials and Methods: Patients attending the psychiatry out-patient department, with primary diagnosis of BPAD and major depressive disorder (according to Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorder: DSM-5), currently in remission with treatment (not fulfilling the criteria for mania/hypomania/depression, according to Young Mania Rating Scale and Hamilton Depression Rating Scale) will be assessed for impulsivity (using Barrat impulsiveness scale [BIS]). HCs were chosen from patients’ accompanying person. Impulsivity of the three groups was compared with one-way analysis of variance. Results: Impulsivity of both BPAD and MDD was found to be higher than HCs on both total score as well as all the subscales of BIS. Conclusion: Impulsivity was found to be higher in BPAD and MDD irrespective of the mood state.

Background Retinoblastoma (RB) treatment aims to ensure survival, globe preservation and visual function. Intra-arterial chemotherapy (IAC) has improved globe salvage, but there remains limited information on visual outcomes following this treatment. This study evaluates final visual acuity (VA) in patients with RB treated with IAC, identifying factors contributing to vision loss. Methods A retrospective review was conducted at La Paz University Hospital in Madrid, including 71 eyes from 60 patients treated with IAC from 2016 to 2025. Data collected included the International Classification of Retinoblastoma and foveal involvement at diagnosis. VA was assessed using the Snellen chart and converted to the logarithm of the minimum angle of resolution (logMAR). The primary outcome was VA. The secondary outcome was the incidence of choroidal occlusive vasculopathy (COV). Results Of the 71 eyes, 24 belonged to patients too immature for VA assessment, and 20 were enucleated due to disease progression. Among the 27 eyes with measurable VA, 7 had a healthy fovea at diagnosis. 23 (85.2%) had a VA≥1.0 logMAR, including 10 (37%) with no light perception. Only four eyes (14.8%) achieved a VA&lt;1.0 logMAR, all with a healthy fovea at diagnosis. Linear regression showed significant association between foveal involvement at diagnosis and reduced final VA. 16 of 71 eyes (22.5%) developed COV, with statistically significant correlation with the number of IAC cycles. Conclusion IAC is effective for tumour control and eye preservation but often yields poor visual outcomes in advanced RB due to pre-existing damage and complications like COV. These findings emphasise the importance of counselling families regarding the visual limitations of IAC treatment.

Antidepressant-induced mania (AIM) is a recognized complication in bipolar disorder, particularly in patients with neurobiological vulnerabilities. Mitochondrial dysfunction, which impairs neuronal energy metabolism, has been implicated in both bipolar pathophysiology and antidepressant sensitivity. We report the case of a 25-year-old woman with bipolar disorder who presented with a two-month history of worsening depressive symptoms. Her medical history included exercise intolerance since adolescence, recurrent migraine headaches. Given her persistent low mood, sertraline was initiated. Within 10 days, she developed pressured speech, decreased need for sleep, and increased goal-directed activity, consistent with hypomania. The antidepressant was discontinued. She remains stable on lurasidone with maintenance ketamine infusions every 7 weeks. This case illustrates the potential role of mitochondrial dysfunction as a biological amplifier for polarity switching in bipolar disorder. Systemic features of mitochondrial impairment may warrant greater caution with antidepressant use, with emphasis on mood stabilizer-centered regimens and close monitoring for early signs of mood elevation.

Early breast lesion detection is crucial for women. According to WHO, breast cancer caused 670 000 deaths globally in 2022. Mammography is one of the best screening tools for early breast cancer detection. Still, with a dose between 3 and 5 mGy to the glandular tissue for a typical mammographic screening examination involving two views of each breast, alternatives might be used if not necessary. Breast ultrasound is an option, especially in young patients and those with dense breasts. This paper aims to present the little-known automated breast ultrasound (ABUS) as a viable alternative to the conventional handheld ultrasound. A literature review was conducted using the keywords “automated breast ultrasound," "ABUS," "ABVUS," and "sonotomography" in the online databases Google Scholar, PubMed, and Web of Science. The review yielded a total of n=267 studies, of which n=83 were considered pertinent. The review was also based on the clinical experience using an ABUS machine at St. Marina University Hospital—Varna (UMHAT “St. Marina Varna”). ABUS is not widely used in most radiology clinics, even dedicated breast clinics. Automated ultrasound is a machine controlled by an X-ray technician or an ultrasonographer, which records a series of breast ultrasound images. The main advantage of the modality is the elimination of operator dependence (with some caveats, which are expanded upon in the “discussion section”), as well as the reduction of subjectivity. If previous studies are available, precise follow-up of the size and localization of breast lesions is possible. However, а suitable additional screening method, АBUS, demonstrates some disadvantages as a diagnostic tool. Some of the limitations are the absence of information for vascularization and the elasticity of a lesion. Possible artefacts include, but are not limited to, retro-areolar shadowing, breathing artefacts, and air interposition between the probe and the skin. ABUS is applicable for screening and follow-up modality, especially in settings with a large patient base or an absence of trained personnel.

Shift work, especially night and rotational duties, forms an indispensable part of nursing services in hospitals, ensuring continuous patient care. However, these work patterns significantly interfere with the body’s intrinsic circadian rhythm, resulting in periods of reduced alertness known as circadian low. Evidence suggests that circadian low is associated with impaired cognitive performance, slowed reaction time, mood disturbances, fatigue, and increased likelihood of clinical errors, thereby affecting both nurse well-being and patient safety. Despite these established risks, nurses working in developing nations such as India often have limited formal training or structured guidance on understanding circadian rhythm disturbances and coping strategies. This study was therefore undertaken to assess the knowledge of nurses regarding circadian low, its effects, and coping strategies, and to evaluate the effectiveness of a Planned Teaching Program (PTP) developed for nurses working in selected hospitals of Surat City. Results revealed that prior to the intervention, the majority of participants demonstrated poor knowledge regarding circadian low and its prevention. The mean pre-test score was 15.17, indicating substantial gaps in foundational understanding. Following administration of the Planned Teaching Program, the mean post-test score increased to 19.52, yielding a mean difference of 4.35. A paired t-test showed the difference to be statistically significant (t = 6.20, p &lt; 0.05), confirming the effectiveness of the teaching intervention. The findings indicate that structured educational programs play an important role in enhancing nurses’ awareness of circadian disruptions and their management.

Background: Malaria remains a major public health issue, especially in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), which still bears the brunt of the disease, with under-5 children disproportionately affected and Nigeria being one of the countries severely impacted. The study investigated predictors of malaria among under-5 children in Nigeria, with special focus on the impacts of housing types and source of drinking water. Methods: Data analysis covered a weighted sample of 9,946 under-5 children from the 2021 Nigeria Malaria Indicator Survey. Descriptive and analytical analyses were conducted, including frequency distributions and logistic regression models at the multivariate level, using Stata software (version 15). Results: The results showed that over half of the children lived in improved houses (53.67%) and nearly three-quarters (74.75%) had access to improved drinking water. However, more than half (54.41%) were still exposed to malaria risk. Children living in houses built with improved materials had a 32% (aOR: 0.68, CI: 0.53-0.87) lower risk of malaria compared to those in unimproved houses. Additionally, those with access to improved drinking water sources had a 15% (aOR: 0.85, CI: 0.67-1.06) reduced risk of malaria infection. Conclusions: The study established a high malaria prevalence among under-5 children, even among those living in improved houses. Also, improved housing quality and access to clean drinking water significantly reduce the risk, highlighting the importance of environmental factors in preventing malaria. Policymakers should focus on enhancing housing and environmental conditions to prevent malaria, prioritising better homes, clean water access, and comprehensive prevention strategies, especially for high-risk areas and under-5 children.

Mazkur maqolada, ekologik auditni huquqiy taʼminlash va ekologik auditning barcha meʼyoriy-huquqiy bazasini takomillashtirish hamda huquqiy tartibga solish mexanizmining oʻziga xos jihatlari, shuningdek ushbu masalada taklif va tavsiyalar bayon qilingan.

Background: Gram-positive sepsis remains a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in neonates. Vancomycin is the standard of care, yet drug monitoring challenges and rising resistance demand alternatives. Daptomycin has potent bactericidal activity, low resistance development and high efficacy in biofilm-associated infections. Experience in the neonatal period is scarce. Methods: This retrospective study focuses on infants with confirmed Gram-positive infection admitted between January 2019 and December 2024. All patients received daptomycin (6 mg/kg every 12 hours) after vancomycin treatment failure or contraindication due to side effects. Demographic, microbiologic, antibiotic treatment features, adverse events and neonatal outcome data were extracted from the infants’ medical records. Results: Fifty-three infants (median gestational age 29 weeks; interquartile range [IQR] 25–37.5) received daptomycin. Staphylococcus epidermidis accounted for 77.4% of isolates; 90% were methicillin-resistant. Median vancomycin exposure before antibiotic switch was 5 days. Blood cultures cleared in 47/52 assessable episodes (90.4%) after a median of 4 days on daptomycin; 1 additional case required adjunctive linezolid. Liver enzyme elevations occurred in 24% of infants, and a self-limited rash occurred in 2%; all were transient and resolved without treatment discontinuation. No muscular or neurologic toxicity was observed. Overall mortality was 24.5% (13/53), but infection-attributable mortality was confined to 4 cases (7.5%); no infection-related deaths occurred after 2020. Conclusions: In this neonatal cohort, which included a high proportion of very preterm infants, daptomycin achieved rapid microbiologic clearance and was generally well tolerated, although liver enzyme elevations were observed in approximately 1 out of 4 patients. These findings support its potential role as an alternative when vancomycin fails or cannot be used. Earlier use in high-risk, catheter-associated infections merits prospective evaluation.

Tuberoskleroz Tanısı ile İzlenen Hastaların Klinik Özellikleri: Tek Merkez Deneyimi isimli çalışma hakkındaki düşüncelerim.

&lt;p&gt;Supplementary Figure S2&lt;/p&gt;

Lighting regimens influence physiological rhythms in poultry, but their effects on cardiac function and melatonin remain unclear. This study investigated the effects of lighting duration (continuous vs. intermittent) and light color (white vs. green) on electrocardiographic parameters and serum melatonin levels in broiler chickens and explored the relationships among these factors. 288 one-day-old male commercial broilers (Ross 308) were divided into four groups and exposed to: Group I, 18 hours light - 6 hours dark (18L: 6D) with white light; Group II, 18L: 6D with green light; Group III, 17L: 3D: 1L: 3D with white light; and Group IV, 17L: 3D: 1L: 3D with green light. The study was conducted in four identical experimental rooms, each consisting of six pens (replicates). A total of 96 chickens, 4 males from each pen (replicate group), were randomly selected for analysis (n = 24). Electrocardiographic variables were measured at 26 and 42 days, and serum melatonin at day 42. Younger birds showed higher heart rate and T-wave amplitude but lower QRS, QT, and related measures compared with older birds. Intermittent lighting reduced heart rate at both ages, while green light decreased heart rate only at day 26. The lowest heart rate and melatonin values consistently occurred under intermittent green light (Group IV). Other electrocardiographic variables were unaffected. Thus, lighting duration and color modulate cardiac function and melatonin secretion, with the strongest effects under intermittent green light. The paradoxical finding of reduced melatonin despite lower heart rate suggests both melatonin-dependent and independent mechanisms.

Forty male 40-days-old Sprague Dawley rats were utilized in this investigation. Control, Thymoquinone, sham, high-fat diet with cholesterol (CHFD) and high-fat diet with cholesterol + thymoquinone (CHFD+T) were the five randomly assigned groups, each consisting of eight rats. Rats in the control, thymoquinone, and sham groups received standard pellet chow for eight weeks, whereas rats in the CHFD and CHFD+T groups were fed mixed pellets that included 65% butter and 2% cholesterol of the daily calorie intake. For 14 days, rats in the CHFD+T and thymoquinone groups received intraperitoneal thymoquinone at a dose of 8 mg/kg following the conclusion of CHFD consumption. Tissues were collected from all rats that were euthanized under deep anesthesia by cervical dislocation. Histology, immunohistochemistry localization of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), and western blotting analyses were performed on testicular tissue samples. Blood samples were taken for analyses of serum lipids. Feeding a high-fat diet with cholesterol led to an increase in body weight, serum levels of total cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein (LDL), very low-density lipoprotein (VLDL), triglycerides and leptin and seminiferous tubule diameters. After treatment with thymoquinone body weight decreased, biochemical values returned to normal levels. Furthermore, thymoquinone's ability to decrease glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) expression in testicular tissue in rats fed a high-fat diet implies that thymoquinone, cholesterol, and a high-fat diet all restrict the release of this growth factor.

Giriş ve Amaç: Bu araştırma çocuğu otizm tanısı alan ve sağlıklı çocuğu olan ebeveynlerin, çocukluk dönem aşılarına yönelik görüşleri, aşı tereddütleri ve risk faktörlerini belirlemek amacıyla yapılmıştır. Gereç ve Yöntemler: Araştırma Karma desen yürütülmüştür. Araştırma verileri Tanıtıcı özellikler soru formu, Ebeveynlerin Çocukluk Aşılarına Yönelik Tutumları Ölçeği ve yarı yapılandırılmış görüşme formu kullanılarak, 1 Ocak – 31 Mart 2024 tarihleri arasında yüz yüze toplanmıştır. Araştırma nicel verileri sayı, yüzde, ki-kare testleri ve logistik regresyon analizi; nitel verileri ise tematik analiz yaklaşımı ile değerlendirilmiştir. Bulgular: Araştırmaya 40 vaka ve 78 kontrol grubu toplam 188 ebeveyn alınmıştır. Vaka grubunun %92.5’i kontrol grubunun ise %11.5’i aşılara karşı tereddütlüdür. Vaka grubunda yer alan ebeveynlerde aşıların zararlı ve gerekli olmadığı düşüncesi daha yaygın iken; çocuklarının eksik aşılı olma durumu daha fazladır. Aşı tereddüttü için risk faktörleri incelendiğinde aşıların yararlı ve gerekli olmadığı düşüncesi 23.33 kat (%95Cl: 0.007-0.653), çocuğun otizm tanısı alması 8.01 kat (%95Cl: 0,000-0.118) ve çocuğa suçiçeği aşısı 7.22 kat (%95Cl: 0.042-5.944) aşı tereddüdü riskini artırmaktadır. Ebeveynler ile yapılan nicel görüşmelerde temalar aşı düşünceleri, aşı tereddütleri ve otizm tanısı ile aşı süreçleri olmak üzere 3 ana tema ve 8 alt tema altında toplanmıştır. Sonuç: Aşıların yararlı olmadığı düşüncesinin aşı tereddüttü için en önemli risk faktörü olduğu dikkate alınarak, bulaşıcı hastalıkların ciddiyeti ve aşıların sağladığı yararlar hakkında bilgilendirmelerin yapılması, sosyal medyada uzman olmayan kişiler tarafından yapılan aşı paylaşımlarının kontrolünün sağlanması önerilmektedir.

Mayer-Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser syndrome (MRKHS) is a congenital condition characterized by aplasia of the vaginawith or without concurrent uterine and/or cervical aplasia.Between the two types ,type 2 or MURCS is a rare formincluding Mullerian agenesis,Renal agenesis and Cervicothoracic somite anomalies.A 17 years old virgin presentedwith feeling of heaviness and lump in abdomen for 6 months with history of primary amenorrhoea till the date anda diagnosed case of MRKH with normal female karyotype 46XX also having unilateral left sided renal agenesis andhistory of multiple surgery for congenital heart disease (TOF), repair of inguinal hernia and laparotomy for pelvicmass with biopsy taking. Evaluation of the patient suggests a tremendous presentation of MURCS association withbenign ovarian tumor. A review of the literature reveals no other cases of MRKH with these tremendous anomalieshaving history of corrected TOF and inguinal hernia as well as with co occurrence of a huge benign ovarian tumor.

Tissue-engineered organoids hold great promise for regenerative medicine, but insufficient vascularization remains a major barrier to their functionalization and clinical translation. Effective vascular networks are essential for organoid scalability, long-term survival, and functionality. Recent research has focused on strategies such as microfluidics, 3D bioprinting, self-assembly, and smart biomaterials to reconstruct functional vasculature. However, challenges persist, including poor structural stability, functional decline, and limited clinical applicability. The concept of “vascularized homeostasis”—a dynamic balance of vascular formation and remodeling—is seen as key to sustaining long-term organoid function. This review summarizes current advances and limitations in organoid vascularization and highlights the role of homeostatic regulation in enhancing repair potential and clinical translation.

Aim: This study aimed to investigate serum soluble CD163 (sCD163) levels in patients diagnosed with leukocytoclastic vasculitis (LCV) and evaluate the relationship between this biomarker and clinical, laboratory, and disease severity. Material and Methods: Forty-three patients with LCV and 45 healthy controls were included in our study. Serum sCD163 levels were measured using ELISA. The differences in sCD163 levels between groups, their correlation with disease, and the relationship between the findings and location were evaluated using ROC and multivariate analyses. Results: CRP, ESR, WBC, PLT, neutrophil count, BMI, and serum sCD163 levels were significantly higher in the LCV group than in the control group, whereas HGB and RBC levels were lower (p

Cavernous sinus meningiomas (CSMs) are a challenging subgroup of intracranial meningiomas because of their close relationship with vital neurovascular structures. This systematic review evaluates the effectiveness and safety of stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) for both primary and adjuvant treatment of CSMs. We analyzed data from 24 studies involving 2,302 patients treated with SRS using various platforms, such as Gamma Knife, LINAC-based systems, and CyberKnife. The median marginal doses ranged from 11 to 19 Gy, with the most recent series using 12 to 14 Gy. Long-term tumor control was excellent, with 5-year progression-free survival rates between 86% and 99%, and 10-year rates from 69% to 97%. Neurological improvement was seen in 20% to 46% of symptomatic patients, especially in cranial nerve function, notably abducens nerve palsy. Radiation-related complications were rare (0-12%) and usually temporary, with permanent deficits occurring in less than 7% of patients. Comparative analysis showed better neurological outcomes with primary SRS compared to adjuvant SRS after microsurgical resection, suggesting that early intervention with SRS may be preferable to watchful waiting or aggressive surgery for carefully selected patients. This review provides Class III, including retrospective comparative studies, and case series evidence that SRS has an excellent risk-benefit profile for CSMs, achieving durable tumor control with minimal morbidity. We recommend a treatment approach favoring primary SRS for small to medium-sized, asymptomatic, or minimally symptomatic CSMs, while advocating for surgical decompression followed by adjuvant SRS in larger lesions with significant mass effect or worsening neurological deficits.

Mastery of the host country language is crucial for migrants to access health services and improve their mental health. This cross-sectional study aimed to investigate the impact of Spanish language proficiency on health literacy and mental health of sub-Saharan African migrant women in Spain. Using online, stratified sampling, 384 women aged 15 to 49 were recruited through social media platforms such as Facebook and Telegram. The research instruments included the CEFR (language proficiency), Masoumi et al. Sexual Health Literacy Questionnaire, and DASS-21 (mental health) questionnaires, which were translated into four languages (Spanish, French, Portuguese, and Swahili). The data were analyzed using structural equation modeling. The findings showed that Spanish proficiency had a positive and significant effect on sexual health literacy and mental health, and sexual health literacy played a mediating role in this relationship. The results suggest that language training programs can improve the mental health of this population by strengthening health literacy.

Introduction : Chronic hyperglycemia and disorders of carbohydrate, fat, and protein metabolism are signs of a metabolic disease known as diabetes mellitus. The disease is caused by abnormalities in the secretion of insulin or the work of insulin. Higher HbA1C levels indicate uncontrolled diabetes mellitus, and in high-risk patients, long-term complications that can be fatal. The presence of albumin in the urine of people with diabetes mellitus causes a problem known as diabetic nephropathy. In a damaged glomerular condition, kidney leakage can occur which allows proteins, especially albumin, to seep into the urine. The purpose of this study was to find out whether there was a relationship between HbA1C levels of prolanis diabetic mellitus patients and microalbuminuria levels at the Kesugihan I Health Center. Method: This study used a cross-sectional description design, with a research sample of results from the HbA1C and microalbuminuria examination of prolanis patients at the Kesugihan I Health Center from January to March 2025, meeting the inclusion and exclusion criteria of 60 samples. Result: The Spearman correlation test for this study found a correlation value of -0.163 between HbA1C and microalbuminuria levels, with a p-value of 0.214. Conclusion: The conclusion of this study is that there is no correlation between HbA1C levels of prolanis patients with diabetes mellitus and microalbuminuria levels at the Kesugihan I Health Center.

19. yüzyılın sonlarında, özellikle Hint alt kıtası ve Mısır merkezli entelektüel hareketlilik, İslâm düşüncesinde köklü bir dönüşüm sürecinin fitilini ateşlemiş; bu süreçte “Kur’ân merkezli İslâm” veya yaygın kullanımıyla “Kur’ân İslâm’ı” söylemi, modern Müslüman zihinlerde derin bir tartışma alanı yaratmıştır. Bu söylem, klasik dönemde mutlak otorite olarak kabul edilen hadis ve sünnet anlayışını yeniden sorgulamaya açmış, bununla birlikte sadece epistemolojik ve metodolojik değil teolojik düzeyde de ciddi kırılmalara yol açmıştır. Kur’ân İslâm’ı yaklaşımı, Kur’ân’ı tek ve aslî referans noktası olarak kabul ederken, hadisleri ve tarihsel yorumları ikincil kaynaklar veya bağlamsal açıklamalar olarak konumlandırma eğilimindedir. Bu yaklaşım, modern dönemde yükselen rasyonalist ve eleştirel düşünce biçimlerinin İslâm düşüncesi üzerindeki etkilerinden bağımsız düşünülemez. Bu makalede, George Tarâbîşî’nin (ö. 2016) Kur’ân-sünnet ilişkisine dair yaklaşımı tarihsel arka plan, felsefî dayanaklar ve usûl-i fıkıh metodolojisi çerçevesinde sistematik biçimde incelenmiş; Kur’ân İslâm’ı söyleminin imkân ve sınırlılıkları eleştirel bir perspektifle değerlendirilmiştir. İncelemenin eksenini, ilk etapta gazete yazılarında başlayan ve sonrasında reddiye türü müstakil çalışmalara evrilen entelektüel tartışmalar oluşturmaktadır. Bu tartışmalar iki Arap düşünce insanı Muhammed Âbid el-Câbirî (ö. 2010) ve George Tarâbîşî arasında cereyan etmiştir. Tarâbîşî ilkin doğduğu toprakların (Suriye ve İslâm Dünyası) kültürel birikimini keşfetmiş ve kendi beyanıyla ona bu keşfi sağlayanın Muhammed Âbid el-Câbirî olduğunu ifade etmiştir. Çalışmada, Tarâbîşî’nin bu bağlamda ortaya koyduğu epistemolojik ve teolojik argümanlar bütüncül bir yaklaşımla analiz edilmiştir. Tarâbîşî’nin dikkat çekici analizlerinden biri de Mâlik b. Enes’e dair değerlendirmesidir. Tarâbîşî’ye göre Mâlik, Kur’ân ile hadis arasında çelişki gördüğünde bu çelişkiyi uzlaştırma yönüne gitmemiş; çoğu zaman Kur’ân’ı öncelemiş ve rivâyetleri te’lif etmek yerine Kur’an merkezli yorumu tercih etmiştir. Onun, hadis karşısında Kur’ân merkezli bir tavır sergilemesi, Tarâbîşî açısından “göreceli bir özgürlük” olarak okunmuştur. Ancak bu özgürlük, sistematikleşmediği ve kuramsal bir temel kazanmadığı için sürdürülebilir olmamış, yerini kısa süre sonra gelen rivâyet merkezli paradigmalara bırakmıştır. George Tarâbîşî, Kur’ân İslâm’ından Hadis İslâm’ına adlı eserinde, Şâfiî ile kurumsallaşan hadis merkezli din anlayışını eleştirel bir zeminde tartışmakta ve Kur’ân’ı mutlak referans noktası kabul eden bir epistemolojik yeniden inşa çabası ortaya koymaktadır. Tarâbîşî’ye göre Şâfiî, yalnızca sünneti Kur’ân’a tabi kılmakla yetinmemiş; onu Kur’ân gibi bir vahiy formu olarak kabul ederek, sünnetin Kur’ân’ı neshedebileceği fikrini sistemleştirmiştir. Bu durum, vahiy kategorisinin genişletilerek rivâyet merkezli dinî bilgi üretiminin önünü açmış ve eleştirel aklın alanını daraltmıştır. Şâfiî’nin bu yaklaşımı, ilerleyen dönemlerde Ehl-i Hadîs’in ilmî ve kurumsal zaferiyle taçlanmış; rivâyete dayalı bilgi, Kur’ân merkezli yorumu neredeyse tümüyle gölgede bırakmıştır. Bu tarihsel zafer, Tarâbîşî’ye göre, İslâm düşüncesinde akıl ve te’vilin değil, rivâyet ve taklidin epistemolojik önceliğe yerleştirilmesinin başlangıç noktası olmuştur.

Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, sahip olduğu doğal ve kazanılmış çoklu antibiyotik direnç mekanizmaları nedeniyle sağlık hizmetleri ile ilişkili enfeksiyonlarda giderek önem kazanan fırsatçı bir patojendir. Bu çalışma, 2023 2025 yılları arasında bir şehir hastanesinde klinik örneklerden izole edilen S. maltophilia suşlarının antibiyotik direnç profillerini ve epidemiyolojik eğilimlerini değerlendirmeyi amaçlamaktadır. Retrospektif ve tanımlayıcı nitelikteki bu çalışmada, klinik örneklerden elde edilen tekrarsız S. maltophilia izolatları incelenmiştir. Tür tanımlaması Bruker SMART MALDI Biotyper MALDI TOF MS sistemi ile yapılmıştır. Trimetoprim sülfametoksazol (SXT) ve levofloksasin (LEV) duyarlılığı BD Phoenix M50 otomatize sistemi ve disk difüzyon yöntemiyle belirlenmiş; sonuçlar güncel CLSI/EUCAST kriterlerine göre yorumlanmıştır. Seftazidim için minimum inhibitör konsantrasyon (MİK) değerleri gradient test (bioMérieux Etest) ile belirlenmiştir. Tanımlayıcı istatistikler Microsoft Excel 16.0 ve IBM SPSS Statistics 26.0 programları kullanılarak yapılmıştır. Toplam 1.745 benzersiz S. maltophilia izolatı analiz edilmiştir. İzolatların çoğu erişkin yoğun bakım ünitelerinden (%49,2) ve solunum yolu örneklerinden (%62,4) elde edilmiştir. Genel direnç oranları SXT için %6,0, LEV için %9,2 olup, SXT direncinde yıllar içinde hafif bir azalma eğilimi gözlenmiştir. Seftazidim için MİK₅₀ değeri 16 mg/L, MİK₉₀ değeri ise &amp;gt;256 mg/L olarak bulunmuştur. S. maltophilia, özellikle yoğun bakım ve solunum yolu örneklerinde izole edilen önemli bir sağlık hizmeti ile ilişkili patojen olmaya devam etmektedir. SXT’ye karşı düşük ve azalma eğilimindeki direnç oranı, bu ajanın halen etkili bir tedavi seçeneği olduğunu göstermektedir. Direnç gelişiminin önlenmesi için düzenli sürveyans ve akılcı antibiyotik kullanımı büyük önem taşımaktadır.

Ventricular septal defect (VSD) is the most common congenital heart disease in children, contributing significantly to pediatric morbidity and mortality globally. In resource-limited settings like Pakistan, delayed diagnosis and limited access to pediatric cardiology services can exacerbate disease outcomes. Objectives: To evaluate the clinical presentation and echocardiographic profile of pediatric patients diagnosed with VSD at a tertiary care center in Pakistan. Methods: This retrospective, cross-sectional descriptive study was conducted at the Department of Pediatric Cardiology of the Peshawar Institute of Cardiology from July 1, 2025, to September 31, 2025. A total of 200 children under 18 years of age with echocardiographically confirmed VSD were included. Data on demographics, clinical symptoms, and physical examination findings were collected. Echocardiographic assessment was used to determine the size, type, and location of VSD, along with associated cardiac anomalies. Results: The median age at diagnosis was 9.4 months, with 78% diagnosed within the first year of life. The most common presenting feature was cardiac murmur (60%), followed by recurrent respiratory infections (49%), feeding problems (42.5%), and failure to thrive (38%). Perimembranous VSD was the most prevalent type (62%), followed by muscular (19%), inlet (10%), and outlet (9%) defects. Associated cardiac lesions included patent ductus arteriosus (18%), atrial septal defect (14%), aortic valve prolapse (11%), and pulmonary hypertension (24%). Conclusions: Early recognition and echocardiographic screening, especially in high-risk groups like children with Down syndrome, are essential to improving outcomes. These findings support the need for enhanced screening and resource allocation in pediatric cardiology services in Pakistan.

Abstract AMPA receptors (AMPARs) mediate fast excitatory synaptic transmission and are essential for neuronal development and brain function. We investigated the role of a recurrent variant in the AMPAR GluA1 subunit (GRIA1 p.A636T) identified in individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and intellectual disability (ID). To test causality and mechanism, we generated a Gria1 -A636T knock-in mouse model. Mutant mice exhibited core ASD/ID-like behaviors and a selective hippocampal vulnerability characterized by progressive dendritic atrophy and neuronal loss. Despite reduced GluA1-containing complexes, AMPARs displayed synaptic hyperexcitability and failed to undergo the normal postnatal transition to calcium-impermeable AMPARs, resulting in persistent excitotoxicity. To explore therapeutic intervention, we designed an allele-specific antisense oligonucleotide to specifically silence the mutant transcript. A single neonatal administration of the antisense oligonucleotide entirely prevented hippocampal pathology and ameliorated behavioral deficits. These findings establish GRIA1 -A636T as a gain-of-function mutation that drives developmental excitotoxicity and highlight the potential of RNA-targeted precision medicine for neurodevelopmental disorders.

Introduction: Adolescence, one of the important processes in human life, is a period in which many important physical, psychological, and social changes occur. However, various physical, psychological, and social changes also occur during pregnancy. Experiencing these important periods at the same time exposes the individual to various risks. This study was conducted to determine the perceptions of motherhood and their needs of adolescent mothers in the prenatal and postnatal periods. Methods: The research was conducted between 20.02.2022 and 28.05.2022 with 30 adolescent mothers who reside in Iğdır province and meet the criteria for inclusion in the research. Demographic and Personal Information Form and semi-structured Adolescent Mother Interview Form, prepared by the researcher, were used as data collection tools. This study was conducted as qualitative research, and the data obtained through semi-structured interviews were analyzed descriptively. The findings were grouped into three themes: prenatal needs, postnatal needs and perceptions of motherhood. Results: Considering the findings of the study, the average age of the adolescent mothers participating in the study was 19.8, the participants did not feel ready for motherhood, and they did not have enough information about the pregnancy process, baby care, health, and nutrition. It was also found that they needed support, and related to this, they did not find themselves fully competent in motherhood. Conclusion: It has been concluded that adolescent mothers perceive motherhood positively to a large extent and need support due to their lack of knowledge and skills in many subjects in the prenatal and postnatal periods.

Objective: The aim of this study was to evaluate the relationship between the triglyceride glucose (TyG) index, a practical biomarker of insulin resistance, and the electrocardiographic indicators of ventricular repolarisation, namely the Tp–e interval, Tp–e/QT, and Tp–e/QTc ratios. Materials and Methods: This retrospective cross-sectional study was conducted at the Department of Cardiology, Faculty of Medicine, Karamanoğlu Mehmetbey University, between 1 January 2024 and 31 September 2025. The demographic, laboratory, and electrocardiographic data of 200 adult individuals who met the inclusion criteria were retrieved from the electronic record system. The TyG index was calculated from fasting glucose and triglyceride levels, and patients were divided into four quartiles (Q1–Q4) according to their TyG values. Tp–e, Tp–e/QT, and Tp–e/QTc measurements were performed by two independent observers from digital ECG recordings. Intergroup differences were evaluated using the ANOVA test, and relationships were assessed using correlation and multivariate regression analyses. Results: The mean age of participants was 51.5 ± 18.8 years, and 51% were male. With an increase in the TyG index, the Tp–e duration (r = 0.558, p &lt; 0.001), Tp–e/QT ratio (r = 0.374, p &lt; 0.001), and Tp–e/QTc ratio (r = 0.422, p &lt; 0.001) significantly increased. In multivariate regression analysis, the TyG index remained an independent predictor of the Tp–e interval (β = 0.38, p &lt; 0.001). According to ROC analysis, a TyG cutoff value &gt; 8.70 predicted the presence of prolonged Tp–e with 77% sensitivity and 72% specificity (AUC = 0.78, p &lt; 0.001). Conclusion: This study is the first to demonstrate an independent association between the TyG index and the Tp–e interval, Tp–e/QT, and Tp–e/QTc ratios. These findings suggest that metabolic stress may contribute to cardiac electrical instability by increasing the heterogeneity of ventricular repolarisation. The TyG index, as an easily calculable parameter, may be a potential biomarker for early detection of subclinical arrhythmic risk.

Aim: This study was conducted to determine the attitudes of individuals aged 65 years and over towards vaccination and geriatric health promotion behaviors during the development of a protective vaccine against pandemic and Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) worldwide. Materials and Methods: The study was conducted as a descriptive study. The sample of the study consisted of 1,646 elderly individuals. Research data were collected by the researchers and surveyors between September 15 and October 23, 2020 after ethics committee approval was obtained. Data collection tools personal information form and “Scale for the Promotion of Geriatric Health” were used. Data analysis was obtained with SPSS-23 package program. Results: Of the research participants, 55.5% were female and 71.7% were between the ages of 65-74. It was found that 72.2 % of the participants had a chronic disease. The study revealed that only 21.8% of participants received vaccinations for in-fectious diseases in the past year, with most not receiving the annual flu vaccine regularly. Additionally, 62.1% of participants reported planning to receive the recommended old-age vaccines from their family physician, following the global emergence of the COVID-19 pandemic. The study found that participants’ willingness to be vaccinated was significantly influenced by their fear of the COVID-19 pandemic, with an impact of 89%. Conclusion: The results of this study show that attitudes towards vaccination and health promotion behaviours of individuals aged 65 years and over increased during the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, it was determined that the pandemic created awareness of vaccination awareness and health promotion in old age in this age group and had positive effects.

Bu çalışma, soğuk zincir lojistiğinde çevresel koşulların ürün kalitesi üzerindeki etkilerini analiz etmek amacıyla tam faktöriyel deney tasarımı yaklaşımını uygulamaktadır. Deney tasarımı (Design of Experiments, DOE), çoklu faktörlerin sistematik biçimde incelenmesini sağlayan güçlü bir istatistiksel yöntemdir. Özellikle 2ᵏ tam faktöriyel tasarımlar, her bir faktörün iki düzeyde ele alındığı ve tüm kombinasyonların test edildiği durumlar için uygundur. Bu yapı hem ana etkilerin hem de iki faktörlü etkileşimlerin detaylı biçimde analiz edilmesine olanak tanımaktadır. Çalışmada yanıt değişkeni olarak taşınan ürünlerin kalite skorları belirlenmiş, dört iki seviyeli faktör incelenmiştir. Bunlar taşıma süresi (12 saat ve 24 saat), iç ortam sıcaklığı (2°C ve 8°C), bağıl nem oranı (%40 ve %80) ve titreşim düzeyidir (düşük ve yüksek). Deneysel veriler varyans analizi (ANOVA), ana etki ve etkileşim grafikleri ile değerlendirilmiştir. Sonuçlar, sıcaklık ve nem gibi faktörlerin doğrudan etkisinin yanı sıra, taşıma süresi ile titreşim gibi ikili kombinasyonların da kalite üzerinde önemli etkiler yarattığını göstermiştir. Elde edilen bulgular, deney tasarımı yönteminin soğuk zincir gibi çevresel değişkenlere duyarlı sistemlerde uygulanabilirliğini ortaya koymakta ve kalite kontrol süreçlerinde karar destek aracı olarak etkinliğini göstermektedir. Bu yönüyle çalışma hem lojistik hem de üretim sektörlerinde DOE uygulamalarına somut bir katkı sunmaktadır.

Orman Terapisi, zihinsel ve fiziksel sağlığı korumayı, ormanın tadını çıkarmayı ve doğayı takdir etmeyi amaçlayan, ormanlara yönelik yapılan, araştırma tabanlı bir şifa uygulamasıdır. Birçok Asya ülkesinde orman terapisi popüler ve uygun maliyetli bir yaklaşımdır ve hükümet tarafından yaygın bir şekilde teşvik edilmektedir. Bu çalışma, Asya ülkelerinde orman terapisinin mevcut durumunu sunmak ve orman terapisini uygulayacak olan diğer ülkelerin nasıl uygulayabileceği konusunda rehberlik etmek amacı ile yazılmıştır. Konu alanının yeni ve güncel olması nedeniyle çalışmada, literatür taramasına dayalı, PRISMA kriterlerine uygun betimsel bir analiz yapılmıştır. Elde edilen bulgular ışığında; orman kaynaklarına sahip olan ülkeler orman terapisi faaliyetlerini artırmak için bu fırsatı değerlendirmelidir. Orman banyosu konusunda Japonya ve Çin, orman terapisi konusunda ise Kore ve Çin gibi ülkelerin öncü olması Asya kıtasında doğa temelli sağlık uygulamalarının ne kadar köklü ve yaygın olduğunu göstermektedir. Çok disiplinli bir alan olarak görülen orman terapisi; ormancılık, tıp, turizm, psikoloji, yönetim ve eğitim gibi çeşitli alanları içermektedir. Ülkesel ve bölgesel ölçekte orman terapisiyle ilgili birçok politika çıkarılabilir. Bunun yanında orman terapisi ve orman terapi rehberi üniversitelerde bölüm veya program bazında olabildiği gibi seçmeli ders olarak ders kataloglarına eklenebilir.

Objectives: This study aimed to compare the efficacy of Nigella sativa ( N. sativa ) mouthwash and chlorhexidine (CHX) in the management of gingivitis. Methods: This triple-blind, parallel-group randomized controlled trial (Iranian Registry of Clinical Trials, IRCT20221212056786N2) was conducted at the Department of Periodontology, School of Dentistry, Shahid Sadoughi University of Medical Sciences, Yazd, Iran. Thirty-six patients aged 20–40 years with gingivitis were randomized in a 1:1 ratio using simple randomization to receive either 20% N. sativa mouthwash or 0.2% CHX mouthwash twice daily for 14 days. Participants, outcome assessors, and statisticians were blinded. Clinical parameters, including plaque index (PI, primary outcome), bleeding index (BI), and staining index (SI), were recorded at baseline and after 14 days. Data were analyzed using analysis of covariance, with statistical significance set at p &lt; 0.05. Results: All 36 participants completed the study. Both N. sativa and CHX mouthwashes significantly reduced PI (mean difference: N. sativa , 33.44 ± 0.72; CHX, 32.72 ± 1.37; p &lt; 0.001 for both) and BI (mean difference: N. sativa , 19.44 ± 0.80; CHX, 19.98 ± 0.81; p &lt; 0.001 for both) after 14 days compared with baseline. Between-group differences were not significant for PI (mean difference: −0.72; 95% confidence interval [CI]: −1.94 to 0.50; p = 0.057) or BI (mean difference: −0.54; 95% CI: −1.10 to 0.02; p = 0.053). A statistically significant but clinically trivial increase in SI was observed in the N. sativa group (mean change: 0.78 ± 1.06; p = 0.006), but not in the CHX group (mean change: 0.44 ± 1.29; p = 0.163). No adverse events, such as taste alteration or mucosal irritation, were reported based on participant self-reports. Conclusions: N. sativa mouthwash showed similar efficacy to CHX in reducing plaque and gingival inflammation over 14 days, suggesting it may be a viable alternative for short-term gingivitis management. However, its potential for slight tooth staining warrants caution, and further studies are needed to assess long-term effects.

هدفت الدراسة إلى التعرف دور المحاسبة القضائية في تعزيز القدرة على اكتشاف الفساد المالي في المؤسسات الحكومية الليبية، حيث اعتمد البحث على المنهج الوصفي التحليلي، وتم تصمم استبانة خصيصاً لاستطلاع آراء الخبراء المحاسبين المقيدين بسجلات محكمة استئناف الخمس، والخبراء المحاسبين بمركز الخبرة القضائية الخمس، وقد تم استخدام أسلوب الحصر الشامل، وذلك نظرا لصغر حجم عينة الدراسة، وتم توزيع عدد 45 استبانة استلم منها 31 استبانة صالحة للتحليل. ومن خلال التحليل الإحصائي للبيانات ظهرت مجموعة من النتائج والتي كان من أهمها؛ أن غالبية أفراد العينة يمتلكون مؤهلات علمية وخبرة ميدانية، لكنهم يفتقرون إلى التدريب المتخصص في المحاسبة القضائية، مما يضعف فاعلية الأداء في التحقيقات. كما أثبتت النتائج وجود علاقات ذات دلالة إحصائية بين التأهيل العلمي والعملي والخبرة والمهارات وفاعلية اجراءات المحاسبة القضائية وبين قدرة المحاسب القضائي على اكتشاف الفساد. أما من ناحية جمع أدلة الإثبات، فقد كانت المحاسبة القضائية ذات أثر ملحوظ في تتبع المعاملات المشبوهة وتحليل المستندات المالية بأسلوب احترافي يدعم العدالة والمساءلة، كما خرجت الدراسة بمجموعة من التوصيات والتي كان من أهمها؛ بضرورة تطوير المناهج الأكاديمية في الجامعات الليبية لتشمل مقررات متخصصة في المحاسبة القضائية، وإنشاء برامج تدريبية عملية تستهدف المحاسبين غير المؤهلين لدعم قدرتهم على كشف الفساد المالي وتحليل الأدلة.

Purpose: This study was conducted to evaluate amputee rehabilitation course content in physiotherapy and rehabilitation curriculum according to International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF). Methods: Academicians teaching amputee rehabilitation in the Faculty of Physiotherapy and Rehabilitation in Türkiye were included in the study. An online survey was distributed to the academicians via email. The survey includes sociodemographic characteristics and 59 ICF categories. These categories were selected by two experts experienced in research fields related to amputee rehabilitation and the ICF, considering the literature on upper and lower extremity amputee rehabilitation. Academicians were asked whether 59 ICF categories were present in the course content, and simply to answer “yes” or “no” to each question. The Cochran’s Q test was used to identify differences in ICF category frequencies, with pairwise McNemar tests and Bonferroni correction applied for multiple comparisons. Results: Seventy-three academicians (43 females, 30 males; mean age: 39.75±10.99 years) responded to the survey. The categories related to sleep functions, high-level cognitive functions, writing, handling stress and other psychological demands most of the categories about domestic life and interpersonal relationship and environmental factors were mentioned significantly less than the other categories in the course content (p<0.001). Conclusion: Interdisciplinary areas such as sleep, high-level cognitive functions, stress management, domestic life, interpersonal relationships, and environmental factors are not sufficiently emphasised in the course content. The amputee rehabilitation course focuses on areas related to physiotherapy. The results revealed that contents related to interdisciplinary fields and collaborative approaches with other disciplines should be integrated into the amputee rehabilitation course.

Bu araştırmada, Din Kültürü ve Ahlak Bilgisi Dersinin (DKAB) merkezi sınavlarda yer almasının etkileri incelenmiştir. Amaç, DKAB'nin merkezi sınavlara dâhil edilmesinin öğretmen ve öğrenci tutumlarına etkisini tespit etmektir. Araştırmada, çeşitli değişkenler dikkate alınarak, 2023-2024 eğitim öğretim yılında Ankara'da görev yapan 20 öğretmenle “durum çalışması” deseni /modeline dayalı olarak yarı yapılandırılmış mülakat formları yoluyla görüşmeler yapılmıştır. Bu konudaki görüşler, ilgili temalarda detayları ile ele alınmış, yorumlanmış ve tartışılmıştır. Sonuçlar, katılımcıların çoğunun DKAB'nin merkezi sınavlara dâhil edilmesini olumlu bulduklarını ve bu durumun dersin ciddiyetini artıracağını düşündüklerini ortaya koymuştur. Ancak, dersin mekanikleşmesi ve araçsallaşması gibi riskler konusunda da endişeler belirtilmiştir. Muafiyet mekanizmasının dezavantajları da tespit edilmiştir. DKAB'nin sınav endüstrisine katılımının, dersi araçsallaştırma ve dersin ruhunu kaybetme riski taşıdığı sonucuna varılmıştır.

Amaç: Gebelik dönemi, kadınlar için fiziksel, duygusal ve bilişsel açıdan zorlu ve karmaşık bir süreçtir. Bu süreçte anne adaylarının sağlık okuryazarlığı düzeyinin düşük olması, yalnızca kendi sağlıklarını değil, aynı zamanda doğacak çocuklarının bakım ve sağlığını da olumsuz yönde etkileyebilmektedir. Bu çalışma, gebelikte anne sağlığı okuryazarlığı ile yenidoğana yönelik hijyenik bakım açısından hazır oluşluk düzeyi arasındaki ilişkiyi incelemeyi amaçlamaktadır. Gereç ve Yöntem: Araştırma tanımlayıcı ve ilişki arayıcı tipte olup, Aralık 2023-Mayıs 2024 tarihleri arasında yürütülmüştür. Araştırma 348 gebe ile tamamlanmıştır. Çalışma verileri Sosyodemografik Özellikleri Tanılama Formu, Sağlık Okuryazarlığı Ölçeği ve Gebelerin Yenidoğanın Hijyenik Bakımına Hazır Oluş Ölçeği ile toplanmıştır. Bulgular: Gebelerin Yenidoğanın Hijyenik Bakımına Hazır Oluş Ölçeği toplam puan ortalaması 60.15±11.89, Sağlık Okuryazarlığı Ölçeği toplam puan ortalaması ise 107.90±16.22 olarak saptanmıştır. Gebelikte anne sağlığı okuryazarlık düzeyi ile yenidoğanın hijyenik bakımına hazır oluş düzeyi arasında pozitif ve düşük-orta düzeyde anlamlı bir ilişki olduğunu belirlenmiştir. Sonuç: Gebelerde sağlık okuryazarlığı düzeyi arttıkça yenidoğan hijyenik bakımına hazır oluşluk düzeyi artmaktadır. Gebelerin sağlık okuryazarlığını geliştirmeye yönelik çalışmalar gerçekleştirilerek, kazanılan bilgi ve becerilerin sağlık alanında etkin biçimde kullanılması sağlanmalı ve bu sayede yenidoğanın hijyenik bakımına yönelik hazır oluşluk düzeylerinin artırılması sağlanmalıdır.

This article synthesises the state of knowledge about Polish seniors’ health literacy (HL) and identifies key socio-demographic and health-related factors influencing HL. A scoping review was conducted following a six-step process and applying the PRISMA framework for article selection. HL was conceptualised as a multidimensional construct, including functional, communicative, and critical levels, and its significance for patient empowerment and healthcare delivery was highlighted. The review results confirm that health literacy among Polish seniors is generally inadequate and shaped by variables such as age, education, place of residence, and access to health information. These findings underscore a significant research gap, particularly in studies assessing HL’s functional, communicative, and critical levels. They also point to the need for initiatives and programmes targeting seniors in rural areas and those with lower levels of education to improve their health literacy and support healthy ageing.

Dukungan keluarga adalah bagian dari dukungan sosial yang berpotensi dapat meningkatkan motivasi dan tingkat kepercayaan diri untuk menghadapi suatu situasi dalam kondisi tertentu. Perubahan fisik dan psikologis kecemasan kehamilan trimester III berpotensi menimbulkan perubahan yang menimbulkan kecemasan yang merupakan suatu ancaman ibu hamil, apabila tidak ditangani akan berdampak pada kesehatan ibu dan janin. Tujuan penelitian menganalisis hubungan dukungan keluarga dengan kecemasan kehamilan trimester III di Puskesmas Mulyorejo. Jenis penelitian ini adalah kuantitatif analitik observasional dengan metode cross sectional pada 32 responden. Instrumen yang digunakan adalah kuesioner modifikasi dukungan keluarga dan kuesioner modifikasi kecemasan kehamilan, dengan analisis Spearman Rho. Hasil menunjukkan mayoritas responden memiliki dukungan keluarga baik (93,75%) dan separuh kecemasan sedang (50.00%), ditemukan dukungan informasi menjadi aspek tertinggi dan dukungan emosional menjadi aspek terendah, kecemasan point tertinggi terkait kontraksi dan persalinan. Hasil uji korelasi Spearman menunjukkan tidak ada hubungan signifikan antara dukungan keluarga dan kecemasan kehamilan (p = 0,453 dan r=0,137). Kesimpulannya bahwa kecemasan kehamilan kemungkinan berhubungan dengan faktor lain yang perlu diteliti lebih lanjut.

Background: Urinary tract infections (UTIs) during pregnancy are among the most common infections worldwide, leading to poor perinatal and maternal outcomes. This study aimed at profiling ESBL-resistant genes and deducing the antibiofilm formation activity of Escherichia coli isolates obtained from pregnant women against the commonly used antibiotics. Methods: Hospital-based cross-sectional study was conducted from March to June 2020, total of 199 pregnant women were involved. Mid-stream urine samples were collected and cultured on CLED at 370C overnight. Positive growths were biochemically analysed for the E. coli isolates identification, drug susceptibility tests were conducted by Kirby Bauer disc diffusion technique and the PCR technique was used to detect the ESBL genes. The antibiofilm formation was analyzed using the ordinary one-way ANOVA Dunnett’s multiple comparison tests (GraphPad Prism, version 9.3) and data was presented in bar graphs. Results: Out of the positive growth, 28 (23.5%) isolates, E. coli species demonstrate resistance to selected antibiotics. From 12 (42.9%) isolates that shows high drug resistance were investigated for ESBL gene profiling, where 8 (42.1%) of them had blaCTX-M, 6 (31.6%) had blaTEM and blaSHV 5 (26.31%) and 8 (66.7%) showed the ability to form antibiofilm against the commonly used antibiotics with 91.66% statistical significance at different levels. Conclusions: The MDR for commonly prescribed drugs and the high prevalence of bacterial UTI were observed with a significant number of ESBL producers. In light of these findings, biofilm formation with antimicrobial resistance genes in urinary tract infection may lead to difficult-to-treat infections.

A 42-year-old man with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis and no prior cardiac history developed a severe but reversible left ventricular systolic dysfunction following ocrelizumab administration. Symptoms started 24–36 hours after the infusion and worsened over 10 days. A thorough diagnostic evaluation, including blood tests, coronary artery angiography, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging, and endomyocardial biopsy excluded ischemic or infectious causes of myocardial damage. Although cardiac complications have not previously been reported with ocrelizumab, this case suggests the drug may rarely cause reversible severe cardiac dysfunction and highlights the importance of vigilance for cardiotoxicity in people with multiple sclerosis.

This study examined the associations between exposure to heavy metals, bisphenol A (BPA), and phthalates and precocious or delayed puberty. This study was a cross-sectional study using the data obtained from the Korea Environmental Exposure and Health Survey in Children and Adolescents. Blood samples were collected to measure lead, mercury, and cadmium levels, whereas spot urine samples were analyzed for BPA, phthalate metabolites, and creatinine levels. Sexual maturation status was assessed using self-measured Tanner stages. Our analyses involved single- and multi-exposure binomial logistic regression models adjusted for age, body mass index, presence of siblings, urban residence, and socioeconomic status. In the multi-exposure models, we applied quantile g-computation mixture analysis to calculate odds ratios (ORs) for precocious and delayed puberty. In the study cohort of 1,424 individuals, precocious puberty was identified in 50 (3.5%) individuals, whereas delayed puberty was identified in 54 (3.8%) individuals. In the single-exposure models, a higher mono-benzyl phthalate concentration was associated with a higher risk of delayed puberty in girls (OR = 2.75, 95% confidence interval: 1.34, 5.66). In the mixture exposure models, exposure to a mixture of BPA and phthalate metabolites was associated with precocious puberty in boys and delayed puberty in both sexes, although the risk estimates were imprecise. Our findings add to the increasing evidence suggesting that exposure to environmental chemicals may contribute to delayed puberty.

Objective: To compare the effects of high-intensity interval training (HIIT) and moderate-intensity continuous training (MICT) on cardiovascular function, gait ability, and hematological variables in chronic stroke survivors.Methods: Twenty-nine higher-functioning, ambulatory chronic stroke survivors were randomized to HIIT (n=15) or MICT (n=14). Participants underwent supervised training three times weekly for six weeks, consisting of 30 minutes conventional therapy followed by 40 minutes aerobic exercise (HIIT: six 1-minute high-intensity intervals at 80%–100% maximum heart rate (HRmax) with 4-minute active recovery; MICT: continuous exercise at 60%–80% HRmax). Outcomes included cardiovascular function (maximal oxygen uptake [VO2max], HRmax, walking heart rate), gait (10-Meter Walk Test, Timed Up and Go test, 6-Minute Walk Test), and lipid profiles (low-density lipoprotein, high-density lipoprotein, triglycerides).Results: In this higher-functioning cohort (n=29), HIIT showed significantly greater improvements than MICT in VO2max (F=40.574, p=0.001), HR_max (F=24.661, p=0.001), walking heart rate (F=11.277, p=0.002), 10-Meter Walk Test (F=20.865, p=0.001), Timed Up and Go test (F=12.317, p=0.002), and 6-Minute Walk Test (F=9.742, p=0.004). Lipid profiles improved significantly within the HIIT group only (p&lt;0.05), no between-group differences were observed.Conclusion: In higher-functioning chronic stroke survivors, HIIT was superior to MICT for cardiovascular fitness and functional mobility under a matched exposure; lipid changes occurred within HIIT only without between-group effects. These findings support incorporating HIIT into stroke rehabilitation programs to enhance recovery outcomes.

Aim: Reports indicate that sleep disturbances diminish the quality of life in people with chronic renal failure receiving haemodialysis. This study aims to identify the demographic and biochemical parameters influencing the sleep quality of haemodialysis patients and to examine the prevalence of restless legs syndrome (RLS). Materials and Methods: Ninety patients from the haemodialysis unit of Kayseri Training and Research Hospital participated in the study. The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) was utilised to assess sleep quality. The diagnosis of Restless Legs Syndrome (RLS) was established according to the criteria set forth by the International Restless Legs Syndrome Study Group (IRLSSG). The patients’ demographic and biochemical parameters were analysed. Results: Suboptimal sleep quality was identified in 55.6% of the patients. The prevalence of HBS was determined to be 54.4%, with 69.4% of patients with HBS experiencing poor sleep quality. A statistically significant correlation was identified between sleep quality and HBS (p=0.007). The presence of RLS was independently associated with poor sleep quality (p=0.001) Conclusion: PSQI serves as an efficient and economical approach for assessing sleep problems in individuals undergoing haemodialysis. Sleep disturbances and restless leg syndrome dramatically impact individuals receiving haemodialysis therapy.

Objective: To compare the diagnostic accuracy of CT scan in identifying solitary liver lesions, in reference to histopathology as the gold standard. Study Design: Cross-sectional Study. Place and Duration of Study: Department of Gastroenterology, Pak Emirate Military Hospital, Rawalpindi, Pakistan, from Jan to Jun 2023. Methodology: A total of 180 patients of both genders, aged 30 to 70 years, who were clinically diagnosed of a solitary liver lesion were included. CT was studied for liver lesions, attenuation value was obtained, and diagnosis was then confirmed with aspiration, cytology, and histopathology by a consultant pathologist. Data was recorded on a proforma and analyzed through SPSS. Results: The Mean age of 51.82±5.98 years. Male patients were 135(75%), and 45(25%) were female patients. CT scan diagnosed 101(56.1%) patients, while histopathology diagnosed 96(53.3%) patients with malignant liver lesions. CT scan has shown sensitivity of 91.6%, specificity 84.5% and diagnostic accuracy of 88%, PPV 87.1% and NPV 89.8% in the diagnosis of malignant liver lesions. Conclusion: The results of our study showed that a CT scan is a useful tool in diagnosing malignant liver masses and helps to avoid unnecessary liver biopsy.

Background: Systemic inflammation is an essential factor in the formation of the tumor microenvironment and has an impact on patient response to immune checkpoint inhibitors. Although there is a growing interest in biomarkers of inflammation, there is a gap in understanding their predictive value for response to nivolumab in clinical practice. The objective of this research was to design and assess a multi-algorithmic machine learning (ML) model based on regular systemic inflammation measurements to forecast the response of treatment to nivolumab. Methods: An analysis of a retrospective real-world cohort of 177 nivolumab-treated patients was performed. Baseline inflammatory biomarkers, such as neutrophils, lymphocytes, platelets, CRP, LDH, albumin, and derived indices (NLR, PLR, SII), were derived. After preprocessing, 5 ML models (Logistic Regression, Random Forest, Gradient Boosting, Support Vector Machine, and Neural Network) were trained and tested on a 70/30 stratified split. Accuracy, AUC, precision, recall, F1-score, and Brier score were used to evaluate predictive performance. The interpretability of the model was analyzed based on feature-importance ranking and SHAP. Results: Gradient Boosting performed best in terms of discriminative (AUC = 0.816), whereas Support Vector Machine performed best on overall predictive profile (accuracy = 0.833; F1 = 0.909; recall = 1.00; and Brier Score = 0.134) performance. CRP and LDH became the most common predictors of all models, and then neutrophils and platelets. SHAP analysis has verified that high CRP and LDH were strong predictors that forced the prediction to non-response, whereas higher lymphocyte levels were weak predictors that increased the response probability prediction. Conclusions: Machine learning models based on common inflammatory systemic markers give useful predictive information about nivolumab response. Their discriminative ability is moderate, but the high performance of SVM and Gradient Boosting pays attention to the opportunities of inflammation-based ML tools in making personalized decisions regarding immunotherapy. A combination of clinical, radiomic, and molecular biomarkers in the future can increase predictive capabilities and clinical use.

The peripartum period, covering late pregnancy through postpartum, brings significant changes that increase the risk of neurological disorders such as cortical vein thrombosis (CVT), osmotic demyelination syndrome (ODS), pituitary apoplexy, postpartum cerebral angiopathy (PCA), posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES), and intracranial hypotension (IH). Accurate diagnosis relies heavily on MRI and CT, with MRI being especially useful for its detailed images. CVT often presents with severe headaches and seizures, detected on MRI through characteristic signs like the “empty delta sign.” ODS, linked to the rapid correction of low sodium levels, appears as T2 hyperintense lesions at specific locations. Pituitary apoplexy, involving sudden hemorrhage within a pituitary adenoma, typically requires high-dose corticosteroids and, in severe cases, surgery. PCA results from hormonal changes and shows as transient artery narrowing on MR angiography, managed with supportive care. PRES, associated with high blood pressure disorders, manifests as vasogenic brain edema, treated by managing blood pressure. IH, often seen after a dural puncture, leads to positional headaches and shows brain sagging on MRI, with treatments ranging from rest to epidural blood patches. Recognizing these imaging patterns is critical for timely diagnosis and effective treatment, ultimately enhancing outcomes for mothers &amp; preventing peripartum morbidity &amp; mortality.

The year 2025 marked a defining stage for NDT—Journal of Non-Destructive Testing, consolidating its position as a global platform for advancing non-destructive evaluation science and technology [...]

Objective: Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is one of the most common causes of lower respiratory tract infections in childhood and contributes significantly to intensive care admissions, particularly among high-risk groups. This study aimed to evaluate the demographic, clinical, and laboratory characteristics of children admitted to the pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) with RSV bronchiolitis over a one-year period and to identify factors associated with length of stay. Materyals and Methods: In this retrospective study, data from 257 children admitted to the PICU with respiratory tract infection between January 1 and December 31, 2024 were reviewed. Nasopharyngeal swab samples of all patients were evaluated using a commercial multiplex PCR panel capable of detecting multiple respiratory pathogens. Demographic characteristics, comorbidities, laboratory parameters, and PICU length of stay were recorded. Appropriate parametric and nonparametric tests were used for statistical comparisons, and independent predictors of length of stay were evaluated using multiple linear regression analysis. Results: The mean age of RSV-positive patients was 3.3 ± 2.1 years, and 59.1% were male. The comorbidity rate was 38.1%. Rhinovirus/enterovirus was the most common viral agent (36.6%), followed by RSV (31.5%). The mean PICU stay for RSV-positive patients was 6.8 ± 2.9 days, which was longer compared to the rhinovirus/enterovirus group. Multiple regression analysis identified age, CRP level, and the presence of comorbidity as independent predictors of longer length of stay (p &lt; 0.05). RSV cases showed a marked increase during the winter months. Conclusions: RSV bronchiolitis continues to represent a significant clinical burden in pediatric intensive care practice. Early identification of factors associated with prolonged hospitalization is crucial for optimizing the management and monitoring of high-risk children. Seasonal clustering underscores the importance of appropriate resource planning and preventive strategies.

The main problem among adolescents related to menstruation is the lack of knowledge about Menstrual Health Management (MHM) and poor water sanitation. This study aims to determine the effectiveness of MHM on the knowledge and personal hygiene behavior of elementary school students in Medan. The research employed a quasi-experimental design with a one-group pretest-posttest approach. The population is all elementary school students in grades 4 and 5. The sample included 67 female and 43 male students, totaling to 110 participants. Data were collected using a questionnaire administered before the intervention (pretest), followed by a health education program consisting of lectures, discussions, and role plays, supported by LCD/PowerPoint presentasions, leaflets, and videos, and then after the intervention (posttest).The sampling technique used was total sampling. Dependent t-test analysis was utilized to assess the data. The results showed a significant difference in respondents’ knowledge before and after the intervention. For attitudes, the mean difference was 3.440 with a p-value of 0.000, indicating a significant effect of the intervention on respondents’ attitudes. Specifically, for male students, the mean difference in knowledge was 7.721 (p = 0.000), and the mean difference in attitudes was 1.628 (p = 0.000), confirming a significant improvement in both knowledge and attitudes after the intervention. Therefore, it is recommended that health workers implement MHM education programs to improve adolescent reproductive health status. Keyword: Menstrual hygiene knowledge, Attitude, Elementary student management

Tecdid, herhangi bir eşyanın, bir sistemin veya bir hükmün ortadan kaldırılması ve yepyeni bir formata dönüştürülmesi faaliyeti değildir. Buna göre İslami hükümlerin tecdidinden bahsedildiğinde de mevcut hükümlerin veya fıkıh birikiminin kökten tasfiye edilmesi ve yeni bir sistemin oluşturulması anlamına gelmemektedir. Aksine tecdid, tarihsel süreç içerisinde asli anlamını kaybetmeye yüz tutmuş hükümlerin veya anlayışların sünnetteki aslına döndürülmesi ve söz konusu hükümlere işlerlik kazandırılması faaliyetidir. Bu özelliğiyle tecdid, hükmün tamamen ortadan kalkması anlamına gelen ilga kavramından ayrılmaktadır. Tecdid ile ilgili çalışmalara bakıldığında tecdid konusunun genellikle bid’atlerin ortadan kaldırılması veya fıkıh usulü ve dini anlayışların yenilenmesi gibi daha genel bir çerçevede ele alındığı görülmektedir. Bu araştırmada ise tecdid, lafızların yeni bir bakışla ele alınması anlamını belirtmek üzere kavramsal tecdid konusu üzerinden özel bir çerçevede anlatılmaktadır. Kavramsal tecdid ifadesi, klasik fıkıh usulü literatüründe tam olarak yer almasa da kavramların anlam açısından yeniden konumlandırılması sürecini ifade etmek üzere metodolojik bir çerçevede kullanılması tarafımızca uygun görülmüştür. Bilindiği gibi kitap ve sünnette yer alan birçok temel kavram, Hz. Peygamber (s.a.v) döneminde asıl anlamlarıyla hükümlere kaynaklık teşkil etmiş ve dönem insanları açısından da bu şekilde doğru bir biçimde idrak edilmiştir. Ancak, sonraki zaman dilimleri içerisinde bazı kavramlar çeşitli kültürel, siyasi ve sosyal etkenlerle bir araya gelerek anlam daralmasına, kaymasına ve hatta büyük ölçüde sapmaya uğramıştır. Bu anlamsal sapmalar, herhangi bir bilim alanında gerçekleştiğinde insanların hayatlarını görece daha az etkileyebilirken; dini kavramlarda gerçekleştiğinde bid’at ve hurafelere de sebep olmaktadır. Bundan hareketle, kavramların tahrifini tespit etmek ve aslına döndürmek, günümüz İslami düşüncesi için elzem bir gereklilik olarak görülmüş ve bu konu çalışmaya değer bulunmuştur. Araştırmamız üç ana kısımdan oluşmaktadır: Birinci bölümde tecdid kavramı ve tecdidle ilgili kavramlar açıklanmıştır. İkinci bölümde ise genel hatlarıyla tecdidin dini bir gereklilik olduğu, uygulanma şartları ve farklı çeşitleri izah edilmiştir. Çalışmanın esasını ve en özgün kısmını oluşturan üçüncü bölümde ise şeriat, cihad ve hac örnekliğinde somut bir tecdid denemesi yapılmıştır. Bu amaçla öncelikle ilgili kavramların vaz olunan kökeni ve lügavi anlamı ortaya çıkarılmaya gayret edilmiştir. Akabinde bu kavramların farklı disiplinlerde ve tarihsel süreçte zaman içinde kazandığı anlamlar incelenmiştir. Bu anlam değişimlerinin kavramın lügavi anlamından ne ölçüde bir sapmaya yol açtığını göstermek için tarihsel semantik analiz yöntemi uygulanmıştır Kavramın tarihsel süreci bu kapsamlı analiz ile detaylıca incelendikten sonra anlamdaki tahrif/sapma tespiti yapılmıştır. Son olarak ele alınan her kavram için tecdid kararı, geliştirilen özgün metot esas alınarak belirlenmiştir. Şeriat ve cihad kavramları, toplum nezdinde anlam tahrifine yüz tuttuğu düşünülen en çarpıcı iki örnek olarak ele alınmıştır. Hac kavramı ise, önemli bir dini kavram olmasına rağmen tahrife maruz kalmamış veya anlamsal kayma yaşamamış bir örnek olarak sunulmuştur.

Background and objective Most children with the rare disorder Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) have feeding difficulties and/or gastrointestinal symptoms such as vomiting and constipation, worsening their postnatal growth. Whether the complaints remain in adult life has not been evaluated by large specialised national centres. Design/setting/patients All 28 individuals who were referred to the national centre for SRS as children were approached at an adolescent or adult age. We used the validated Gastrointestinal Symptom Rating Scale (GSRS) questionnaire to assess gastrointestinal symptoms during the last week. Individuals with the most bothersome gastrointestinal symptoms completed the Rome IV Diagnostic Questionnaires online, General Anxiety Disorder-7, the Patient Health Questionnaire-9, the Patient Health Questionnaire-12 Somatic Symptom scale and the Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System Global-10. Results The GSRS questionnaires were completed by 18 individuals from the age of 14 years. There was at least one gastrointestinal symptom of moderate severity reported by 11 (61%) individuals. The most frequent symptom domain was related to ‘Indigestion’ (27%), ‘Reflux’ (22%) and ‘Constipation’ (22%). Among 11 individuals with at least one gastrointestinal symptom of moderate severity, six completed the Rome IV Diagnostic Questionnaires and five were diagnosed with a disorder of gut-brain interaction. Conclusion Short-term gastrointestinal symptoms are common in young adults diagnosed with SRS. This needs to be further evaluated in prospective studies assessing the chronicity of the symptoms.

Background: Post-operative pain following breast surgery can impair recovery and contribute to chronic pain syndromes. Ultrasound-guided pectoral nerve block (PECS I and II) blocks have emerged as effective regional anesthesia techniques. Adding adjuvants to ropivacaine may prolong analgesia and enhance patient comfort. Aims and Objectives: This study aims to compare the efficacy of 0.25% ropivacaine with dexmedetomidine versus 0.25% ropivacaine with magnesium sulfate in PECS I and II blocks for unilateral breast surgery. Materials and Methods: In this prospective, randomized, double-blind trial, 100 American Society of Anesthesiologists I–II female patients aged 18–60 years undergoing unilateral breast surgery under general anesthesia were allocated equally to receive PECS I and II blocks with ropivacaine plus dexmedetomidine (Group A) or ropivacaine plus magnesium sulfate (Group B). Primary outcomes included post-operative pain scores, Visual Analog Scale (VAS), time to first rescue analgesia, and total 24-h analgesic consumption. Secondary outcomes were intraoperative hemodynamics, patient satisfaction, and adverse effects. Results: Group A demonstrated significantly lower VAS scores at 1 h (1.61±0.51 vs. 1.92±0.57, P=0.02) and 6 h (2.33±0.68 vs. 3.09±0.72, P=0.001) postoperatively. Time to first rescue analgesia was longer in Group A (9.8±1.5 h vs. 6.5±2.0 h, P=0.002) with reduced paracetamol use over 24 h (1.905±0.450 g vs. 2.915±0.651 g, P=0.001). Patient satisfaction was higher in Group A (8.8±0.7 vs. 7.9±1.0, P=0.003). Hemodynamic parameters and adverse effects were comparable, though bradycardia was more frequent in Group A without clinical significance. Conclusion: Dexmedetomidine as an adjuvant to ropivacaine in PECS blocks provides superior early post-operative analgesia, prolonged pain-free intervals, reduced analgesic consumption, and higher satisfaction compared to magnesium sulfate, with similar safety.

Muscle coordination pattern can be disrupted by neural disorders and perceptual disturbance, leading to abnormal gaits. However, it is still unclear how neuro-muscular control regulates walking gaits through training and exercising due to lengthy rehabilitation periods and complicated musculoskeletal redundancies. This paper proposes a gait rehabilitation monitoring method based on muscle deformation to elucidate the evolution of muscle coordination during the full-course vertigo-gait rehabilitation. The proposed method is verified by musculoskeletal dynamics simulation and experimentally validated through immediate applications to five healthy subjects and five vertigo patients. The vertigo gaits were assessed by comparing with the normal gait of healthy subjects. For the first time, this paper reports experimental results and muscle coordination analysis throughout the full course of vertigo-gait rehabilitation. The findings reveal that the vertigo patient adjusts phase difference between the rectus femoris (RF) and medial gastrocnemius (MG) at toe-off, driving the knee and ankle joints to regulate foot-to-ground angle, thereby enhancing gait stability and walking efficiency. These results indicate that muscle deformations serve as an alternative quantity besides traditionally employed kinematic features, and the proposed wearable sensing method is expected to provide an effective tool for clinical gait assessment.

Sepsis, a life-threatening condition arising from a dysregulated host response to infection, remains a significant clinical challenge with limited therapeutic options. RNA editing presents a promising avenue for modulating gene expression to attenuate the inflammatory cascade characteristic of sepsis. Here, we introduce an approach utilizing chemogenetic activation of CasRx-based RNA editing via bioengineered lentiviruses for the treatment of sepsis. Our strategy involves the targeted delivery of biomineralized lentiviral vectors encoding RNA-editing enzymes and chemogenetic switches to M1 macrophage populations implicated in sepsis pathogenesis. Upon the administration of a small molecule ligand, the chemogenetic switches activate the RNA-editing tool, CasRx, thereby enabling precise and repeated downregulation of NLRP3 mRNA. We demonstrate the efficacy and repeatability of this viral-based approach in mouse models of sepsis, highlighting its potential as a versatile therapeutic strategy for mitigating sepsis-induced inflammation. This study underscores the utility of chemogenetic technologies in harnessing the power of RNA editing for the treatment of sepsis and other inflammatory disorders.

ABSTRACT Objectives To objectively quantify early and mid‐term facial tightening after dual‐wavelength Er:YAG/Nd:YAG laser treatment in Chinese women using three‐dimensional (3D) imaging. Materials and Methods In this prospective observational study, 13 women with lower facial aging underwent four full‐face treatment sessions of dual‐wavelength Er:YAG/Nd:YAG (Fotona 4D) at 1‐month intervals. Standardized 3D facial images were obtained at baseline and at 1 week, 1, 3, and 6 months after completion of the final treatment session. The primary objective outcomes were vertical displacements (mm) of predefined periocular and midfacial landmarks relative to baseline. Secondary outcomes included Wrinkle Severity Rating Scale (WSRS) scores for nasolabial folds and VISIA pore scores, evaluated at baseline and at 3 and 6 months. Adverse events were recorded. Results 3D analysis demonstrated significant early and mid‐term tightening in the lateral periorbital region. The vertical distance from the lateral canthus to the nasal base decreased by approximately 0.50–0.63 mm at 1 week and by 0.60–0.63 mm at 3 months bilaterally (all p &lt; 0.05), with partial rebound but persistence of mild improvement at 6 months. The highest point of the zygomatic bone showed a delayed, mild elevation that peaked around 1–3 months. WSRS scores for nasolabial folds decreased by about 1 grade at 3 and 6 months on both sides (all p &lt; 0.001). VISIA pore scores improved from 4.97 ± 0.36 at baseline to 3.37 ± 0.43 at 3 months and 3.73 ± 0.54 at 6 months (both p &lt; 0.001). Only transient erythema and edema were observed. Conclusions Dual‐wavelength Er:YAG/Nd:YAG laser tightening produced early and mid‐term improvements in periocular and midfacial laxity, as captured by 3D landmark displacement, with concomitant improvements in wrinkles and pores. 3D imaging provides a sensitive, objective tool to visualize region‐specific dynamic responses to energy‐based facial rejuvenation.

Background/Objectives: The impact of choline on congenital heart defects (CHDs) in humans remains unclear. This study aimed to investigate the associations between maternal dietary intakes of choline and choline derivatives during pregnancy and CHD. Methods: This case–control study included 474 cases and 948 controls from hospitals in Northwest China. Pregnant women admitted for delivery were enrolled and completed a validated food frequency questionnaire to assess their dietary intake during pregnancy. A standardized questionnaire was also administered to collect additional pregnancy-related information. Mixed logistic regression models were used to estimate ORs (95%CIs) for CHD in association with choline intake. Results: Higher intakes of total choline, phosphatidylcholine, sphingomyelin, glycerophosphocholine, and phosphocholine in pregnancy were associated with reduced risks of total CHD, ventricular septal defects, and atrial septal defects, with all trend tests showing statistical significance (all p &lt; 0.05). The ORs (95%CIs) of total CHD, comparing the highest with the lowest tertiles of intake, were 0.38 (0.24–0.61) for total choline, 0.51 (0.38–0.70) for phosphatidylcholine, 0.37 (0.26–0.51) for sphingomyelin, 0.34 (0.21–0.53) for glycerophosphocholine, and 0.53 (0.34–0.82) for phosphocholine. The inverse associations remained unchanged according to maternal age, work, education, parity, passive smoking, anemia, medication use, or folate/iron supplements use in pregnancy; however, these associations appeared to be more pronounced among pregnant women in urban areas. Conclusions: Higher maternal intake of dietary choline during pregnancy may be associated with a lower risk of CHD. Promoting choline intake in pregnant women could serve as a potential strategy for the primary prevention of fetal CHD in China.

Objective: To compare the surgical outcome and postoperative complications of symphysis and parasymphysis fractures in 3-D and conventional miniplating systems. Study Design: Randomized Controlled Trial. Place and Duration of Study: Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Combined Military Hospital, Peshawar Pakistan, from Aug 2023 to Sep 2024. Methodology: According to the inclusion criteria, 33 patients were eligible who were then divided into two groups. The anterior mandible fractures in Group A (n=17) were treated with 3-D mini plates, and those in Group B (n=16) were treated with conventional mini plates. Results: Demographic characteristics were compared but none were found to be statistically significant. Out of enrolled 33(58.0%) patients, were randomized into two groups: 17(27.4%) in Group A (3-D plating) and 16(25.8%) in Group B (conventional miniplates). The results observed were not statistically significant for stability, pain, and wound dehiscence in three consecutive follow-up visits (p-value&gt;0.05). However, malocclusion, evident on the first postoperative day in 4(25.0%) patients of Group B, was found to be statistically significant (0.027). Conclusion: Better surgical outcomes and minimal postoperative complications were noted among patients offered 3-D plates compared to conventional miniplates and appreciable results were noted, especially in achieving satisfactory occlusion.

This study compared the effectiveness of CIDR (Controlled Internal Drug Release)-PGF2α protocol in terms of the duration of CIDR placement for the treatment of anestrus in buffaloes during low breeding season. Anestrous Murrah-cross buffaloes were randomly assigned to two Treatment groups. In Group 1 (T1, n = 15), a CIDR was inserted intravaginally for 7 days, while in Group 2 (T2, n = 15), the CIDR was inserted for 9 days. Each buffalo in both groups received an injection of a PGF2α analogue, cloprostenol (500 μg), 24 h before CIDR removal. Artificial insemination (AI) was performed twice, at 60 and 72 h after CIDR removal. Ovarian cyclicity status during CIDR insertion and the size of the corpus luteum (CL) on 7th day after AI were assessed using transrectal ultrasonography. Body condition score (BCS), endoparasitic infection, anemic score, suckling status and lactation stage were recorded. Pregnancy was diagnosed two months after AI. No significant differences were found between two Treatment groups regarding estrus induction, ovulation and pregnancy outcomes. The overall estrus induction, ovulation and pregnancy rates were 81%, 93% and 26%, respectively. The ovarian cyclicity status at CIDR insertion affected the ovulation and pregnancy outcome. Additionally, the size of CL one week after AI had an influence on pregnancy outcome (P=0.03). In conclusion, the ovarian status at CIDR insertion and the CL size one week after AI, but not the duration of CIDR placement, influenced the success of CIDR-PGF2α protocol in treating anestrus in buffaloes during low breeding season.

Ushbu maqolada barkamol yoshlarni tarbiyalash jarayonida gʻoyaviy tarbiyaning tutgan oʻrni va ahamiyati tahlil qilingan. Globallashuv sharoitida shakllanayotgan axborot maydoni, yoshlarning dunyoqarashi, maʼnaviy qadriyatlari va ijtimoiy faolligiga taʼsir koʻrsatadigan omillar yoritilgan. Gʻoyaviy tarbiya orqali yoshlarni mustahkam hayotiy pozitsiya, tanqidiy fikrlash, milliy va umuminsoniy qadriyatlarga sadoqatni shakllantirish jarayoni ilmiy asosda izohlangan.

Background: Malnutrition is a frequent and serious complication in patients undergoing continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD), contributing significantly to morbidity and mortality. The malnutrition inflammation score (MIS) offers a comprehensive assessment by integrating clinical, anthropometric, and biochemical parameters. Aims and Objectives: The objective of this study was to evaluate the nutritional status of CAPD patients using the MIS and to determine its correlation with dialysis adequacy (Kt/V) and selected anthropometric and biochemical markers. Materials and Methods: A cross-sectional study was conducted among 30 CAPD patients at Maharani Laxmi Bai Medical College, Jhansi, from May 2024 to April 2025. Nutritional status was assessed using MIS, along with body mass index (BMI), mid-arm circumference (MAC), triceps skinfold thickness (TSF), and biochemical markers including serum albumin, hemoglobin, serum urea, creatinine, and total iron binding capacity (TIBC). Dialysis adequacy was calculated using weekly Kt/V. Statistical analysis was performed using Student’s t-test. Results: Among 30 participants (mean age 48.23 years, 60% male), 70% were malnourished (MIS ≥5). Malnourished patients exhibited significantly lower BMI, MAC, serum albumin, hemoglobin, and TIBC levels (P&lt;0.05). Patients on higher-dose CAPD regimens (4 exchanges/day) demonstrated better dialysis adequacy (Kt/V = 1.43±0.10) and significantly lower MIS scores (P=0.001), suggesting improved nutritional outcomes with enhanced dialysis dosing. Conclusion: Malnutrition is prevalent among CAPD patients and closely correlates with lower anthropometric and biochemical indices. Higher dialysis adequacy is associated with better nutritional status. Routine MIS-based screening and individualized dialysis optimization are recommended to improve patient outcomes.

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) patients often struggle to balance the risks and benefits of their treatment options, leading to dilemma in decision-making process. Shared decision-making (SDM) is considered as the cornerstone of patient-centered care by engaging patients in treatment choices across various chronic diseases, including CKD. This review explores the significance of SDM in CKD care and highlights the barriers to its implication. This review was conducted in accordance with the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses-scoping reviews guidelines. Literature search was conducted using Scopus, ProQuest, and PubMed databases. Out of the initially searched 18742 articles, 20 articles are included in this review. The findings revealed that SDM improved patient engagement, self-efficacy, and reduced decisional conflict in CKD management. However, barriers such as limited health literacy, disease-knowledge gaps, and inadequate communication hindered effective decision-making. In addition, social, demographic, and psychosocial factors influenced self-care behaviors and treatment choices. Despite the potential benefits, many CKD patients do not experience SDM due to inadequate information and time constraints. Educating patients and training healthcare professionals are crucial steps for improving SDM practice in CKD care. Future studies should explore patient-clinician interaction and focus on the effects of culture and ethnicity on decision-making for effective treatment.

Remaja primipara merupakan kelompok maternal yang rentan mengalami tantangan fisiologis, psikologis, dan sosial selama kehamilan, persalinan, dan masa nifas sehingga memerlukan pendekatan asuhan khusus. Penelitian studi kasus ini bertujuan menganalisis peran edukasi personal dan kontinuitas asuhan kebidanan dalam mendukung adaptasi perilaku kesehatan pada seorang ibu berusia 19 tahun dengan status gizi kurang (IMT 16,6 kg/m² dan LILA 19 cm). Pengumpulan data dilakukan melalui observasi, wawancara, pemeriksaan fisik, dan dokumentasi asuhan kebidanan komprehensif sejak masa antenatal hingga konseling KB. Hasil penelitian menunjukkan bahwa edukasi yang diberikan secara sistematis dan berkelanjutan mampu meningkatkan pemahaman ibu terkait perubahan fisiologis kehamilan, manajemen ketidaknyamanan, serta praktik perawatan diri dan bayi. Keberhasilan Inisiasi Menyusu Dini, praktik ASI eksklusif hingga dua minggu postpartum, serta pemilihan metode KB Laktasi Amenorea menunjukkan peningkatan self-efficacy maternal dan kualitas pengambilan keputusan kesehatan. Selain itu, penerapan continuity of care turut meningkatkan kedisiplinan kunjungan, penerimaan edukasi, serta kesiapan ibu menjalani masa transisi menjadi orang tua. Hasil studi ini menyimpulkan bahwa edukasi personal yang terarah dan kontinuitas asuhan kebidanan efektif dalam meningkatkan adaptasi perilaku kesehatan maternal pada remaja primipara dan direkomendasikan untuk dioptimalkan dalam pelayanan kebidanan, terutama di fasilitas pelayanan primer.

Background: There is a high prevalence of the double burden of malnutrition (DBM) in children and adolescents in South Asia. This research aims to explore which sociodemographic factors are attributed to DBM in urban Bangladesh, a South Asian country. Methods: We conducted secondary analyses of data obtained from the national survey of childhood obesity among school-age children in Bangladesh (2012–2013). The sample includes 4140 children (aged 5–9 years) and adolescents (10–19 years) randomly recruited from the city corporation (urban) areas in all administrative divisions. At the population level, DBM was defined as the coexistence of underweight and overweight/obesity among children and adolescents. At the household level, DBM was defined as maternal underweight co-occurring with child overweight/obesity within the same mother-child dyad. A multivariable logistic regression model was fitted to estimate odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals. A rapid policy review was conducted to understand the implication of the results obtained from the analysis. Results: The prevalence of DBM at the population level was 45.2% (95% CI: 42.5–45.5%), ranging between 40.0% and 47.6% across seven divisions (p &lt; 0.001). At the household level, DBM prevalence was 16.6% (95% CI: 14.7–18.7%), ranging between 14.0% and 19.0% across seven divisions (p = 0.015). At the population level, DBM odds were 56% higher among younger children (5–9 years) than adolescents (10–19 years) (OR: 1.56; 95% CI: 1.37–1.78), and this association was found in four divisions. At the household level (mother-child pairs), DBM odds were 64% higher in younger children than adolescents (OR: 1.64; 95% CI:1.38–1.95); and higher in children living at a lower-middle socioeconomic status (SES) and middle SES, than upper SES. The policy review revealed that Bangladesh has made substantial commitments to improve nutrition; however, reference to DBM is absent from policy documents. Conclusions: The prevalence of DBM is high among children in urban areas in Bangladesh, disproportionately affecting younger children and households with low SES. In the current policy space, Bangladesh should revise national nutrition frameworks to recognize DBM as a public health priority and implement region-sensitive strategies for preventing and reducing malnutrition among school-aged children.

<title>Abstract</title> <bold>Background</bold> Laryngocele was first described by Virchow in 1867 as a herniation of the laryngeal ventricle ( <italic>laryngocele ventricularis</italic> ). Dominique Larrey had earlier used the term <italic>goitre aériennes</italic> to describe this condition. <bold>Aim</bold> To propose a clinical staging system for combined laryngoceles based on the extent of internal anatomical extension and to validate this system through clinical, endoscopic, and radiological correlations. <bold>Patients and Methods:</bold> A retrospective study was conducted on 24 patients with combined laryngoceles admitted to the Otorhinolaryngology Department, Mansoura University Hospital, Egypt, between 1998 and 2022. Clinical presentation, endoscopic findings, and imaging results were analyzed to evaluate and validate the proposed staging system. <bold>Results</bold> All patients presented with an external component. Sixteen cases were classified as stage V1 (ventricle involvement), 66.7% as stage V2 (ventricle and vestibule involvement), and 16.7% as stage V3 (ventricle, vestibule, and vallecula involvement). Dysphonia, aerodigestive obstruction, and dysphagia did not differ significantly between cases with or without air content. However, stridor and dyspnea were more frequent in air-containing laryngoceles. Endoscopic grading was not significantly affected by air content. <bold>Conclusion</bold> The proposed clinical staging system for combined laryngoceles (V1, V2, V3) is simple, feasible, and reliable. Validation through clinical, endoscopic, and radiological findings supports its potential as a practical tool for standardized assessment.

Objective: To evaluate the different Dermoscopic patterns of onychomycosis. Study Design: Cross-sectional Study. Place and Duration of Study: Department of Dermatology, PNS Shifa Hospital, Karachi Pakistan, from Aug 21 to Feb 22. Methodology: A total of 200 patients with clinically diagnosed onychomycosis were included in the study via a non-probability consecutive sampling technique. Onychoscopic examination was done with a handheld dermoscope (HEINE DELTA 20T DERMETOSCOPE) a ×10 magnification. All Onychoscopic patterns were identified, documented, and statistically analyzed using Mean, SD, frequency, and percentages. Results: Out of 200 cases, 72(36%) were men and 128(64%) were women with a ratio of 1:1.7. The Majority of patients were in an age range of 40–56 years, 100(50%) followed by 20–40 years 88(44%), and greater than 60 years 12(6%). The duration of signs of nail disease was between 2 months to 2 years. Distal and lateral subungual onychomycosis in 148(74%) patients was the most prevalent clinical condition, and most frequently seen clinical sign was discoloration of nail plates in 180(90%) patients. The common Onychoscopic patterns observed were spikes in 90(45%) patients, followed by distal irregular termination in 72(36%), jagged in 54(27%), longitudinal striae in 94(47%), and linear edge in 6(3%). No association was found between these patterns and age, duration of disease, gender, type of onychomycosis, and co-morbidities (p&gt;0.05). Conclusion: Onychoscopy is a simple, non-invasive, quick, and affordable diagnostic procedure that can be used to identify minute nail alterations that are invisible to the unaided eye. It helps with early nail issue diagnosis so

O artigo “Relevância da Tutoria Acadêmica na Formação Médica do Centro Universitário Tabosa de Almeida: Um Relato de Experiência” apresenta uma análise profunda sobre o impacto da tutoria na formação médica, fundamentada na Aprendizagem Baseada em Problemas (ABP). Essa metodologia ativa transforma o estudante em protagonista do próprio aprendizado, estimulando a autonomia intelectual, o raciocínio clínico e a construção coletiva do conhecimento. A experiência, desenvolvida ao longo de quatro semanas tutoriais em 2025, envolveu sete discentes orientados por tutores e docentes supervisores. As atividades foram estruturadas em torno de situações-problema que exigiam investigação, discussão e aplicação prática dos conteúdos médicos, promovendo um ambiente de aprendizagem colaborativo e reflexivo que aproximou a teoria da realidade clínica. Os resultados revelaram alto engajamento, com frequência superior a 97% e avanço contínuo no desempenho avaliativo. As discussões abordaram temas como Síndrome de Burnout, Metodologias Ativas, Inteligência Artificial na Medicina Humanizada e Judicialização da Prática Clínica, fomentando reflexões éticas, emocionais e tecnológicas sobre o papel do médico na contemporaneidade. Conclui-se que a tutoria baseada na ABP é uma ferramenta pedagógica transformadora, capaz de integrar conhecimento técnico, empatia e responsabilidade social. Ao promover diálogo e pensamento crítico, fortalece a formação de médicos conscientes, éticos e preparados para os desafios complexos da Medicina moderna, reafirmando o compromisso com uma aprendizagem significativa, humanizada e socialmente comprometida.

Bu çalışmamızda kötülük problemine mevcut teodiselere alternatif olarak teklif edilen, “aşk teodisesi”ni karşılaştırmalı ve betimleyici bir perspektifle inceleyeceğiz. Kötülük problemi karşısında mevcut teodiselerin muhatapların sorularına tatmin edici cevap verememesi ve ateist argümanları çürütememesi gibi nedenlerden dolayı teklif edilen “aşk teodisesi”, Tanrı-âlem-insan denkleminde rasyonalist bir yaklaşımdan ziyade irfanî/mistik bir kabul ile “sevgi” eksenli bir tasavvurla dikkat çekmektedir. Aşk teodisesini, insana iyi ve güzel olanı tercih etme öngörüsü kazandırma, insanların mutluluğa erişme çabasına katkı sağlayabilme ve tecrübe edinilen kötülükler karşısında umut, metanet, hoşgörü tavrı edindirme, ilahî adalet beklentisine umut ışığı olabilme gibi özellikleri olduğu iddiasından dolayı incelemeyi tercih ettik. Kötülük problemine karşı alternatif teodise arayışında kötülüğü özsel olarak inkâr eden veya her şeyi kötülüğe atfeden düşüncelerin ontolojik ve epistemolojik bir zeminde yorum yapmalarına olanak sağlanabilmektedir. İşte bu özellikleriyle aşk teodisesinin reel/pratik yön taşıdığı ve kötülük probleminin de varoluşsal bir öz taşıdığı iddiası mantıksal bir zemine oturtulabilmektedir. Bu teodise diğer teodiselerden “sevgi”, “inanç” “nefs terbiyesi” perspektifiyle ayrı bir yapı arz ederek din felsefesinde alternatif ve yeni bir perspektif sunabilir. Araştırmamızda aşk teodisesinin tanımlaması, analizi, mantıksal ve inançsal temellendirilmesiyle farklı teodiselerle ilişkisi gibi durumları din felsefesi perspektifiyle temel referans kaynaklardan hareketle incelemeyi amaçlamaktayız. Bu teodiseyi sistemli, rasyonel, derinlikli ve şümullü bir çerçevede irdeleyip artı ve eksilerini ortaya koymak ve müstakil bir çalışma yaparak din felsefesine ve Türkçe literatüre katkı sağlamak ana hedefimizdir. Problemle ilgili temel kaynaklara başvurarak bu teodiseyi ontolojik, epistemolojik ve aksiyolojik bir zeminde tartışmanın, İslam tasavvufu ve Anadolu irfanı geleneğinden Yûnus Emre, Mevlânâ ve Dâvûd-i Kayserî gibi isimlerle sınırlandırarak literatüre katkı sağlamanın önemli olduğu kanaatindeyiz.

Background: Children are the foundation of a nation, and those in rural areas and lower socio-economic groups are vulnerable to malnutrition. This study aimed to evaluate and compare the nutritional status of preschool children and the socio-demographic factors affecting their growth in urban and rural Anganwadi centers (AWCs) of Davangere district. Methods: An observational, descriptive, cross-sectional survey was conducted in year May 2023 to October 2024 in both urban and rural AWCs of the Davanagere district. A total of 120 children aged 3-5years children were selected using multistage sampling and were screened using anthropometric measurements such as height, weight and mid upper arm circumference. Socio-demographic information was collected using self-structured questionnaire. Data were analyzed using SPSS v20 with p&lt;0.05. Descriptive statistics and chi-square tests assessed associations between nutritional status and dichotomized sociodemographic variables. Results: In urban areas, 10% of children had moderate underweight and 5% had severe underweight, moderate stunting and severe stunting each, and 11.6% and 1.6% had moderate wasting and severe wasting respectively; whereas in rural areas, 6.6% had moderate underweight and 13.3% had severe underweight, 16.6% had moderate stunting and 5% had severe stunting, and 15% had moderate wasting with 5% showing severe wasting. Malnutrition was found to be associated with factors such as age of mother at marriage, family type, birth weight, breastfeeding practice, colostrum given and economic status of family. Conclusions: Malnutrition exists in both settings, driven by maternal and socio-economic factors, warranting targeted interventions.

Background/Objectives: Older people with hip fractures (HF) are highly heterogeneous patients at risk of adverse events, which impacts healthcare and economic systems. Tools for estimating 30-day and 1-year mortality may help optimize patient management decisions. The Nottingham Hip Fracture Score (NHFS) is one of the most reliable tools for assessing 30-day mortality after surgery. The aim is to validate the NHFS in a cohort of Italian patients hospitalized due to HF and enhance its predictive capacity against 30-day and 1-year mortality. Methods: A prospective observational study among older patients with HF who underwent surgery after a comprehensive geriatric assessment (CGA). Data about 30-day and 1-year mortality were gathered from regional registries. Logistic regression analyses were performed to assess the predictive accuracy of the NHFS against 30-day and 1-year mortality. The adapted scores were measured using ROC curves, and a nomogram was developed. Result: Among 1169 patients, 30-day and 1-year mortality rates were 4.3% and 21.3%, respectively. The NHFS was validated and recalibrated in the study sample for 30-day mortality. The recalibrated NHFS showed better predictive capacity for 30-day mortality (AUC 0.693) than the ASA score (AUC 0.547) and remained a significant predictor for 1-year mortality (AUC 0.712). BADL and METs showed an association with mortality, so the modified NHFS was integrated, resulting in a more accurate prediction compared to the original score for 1-year mortality (AUC = 0.747). Conclusions: The NHFS is a reliable tool for estimating 30-day and 1-year mortality in Italian older adults with HF. The revised NHFS, which includes METs and BADL, offers higher predictive power than the original version in our sample, and the nomogram may facilitate its clinical use.

Background United States drug policy is primarily based on the Controlled Substances Act of 1970 and largely contradicts scientific evidence about how to mitigate drugs' harms. Expert consensus on drug harms could inform policy that improves the health of people who use drugs while reducing negative societal impacts of drug use. Therefore, this study adapted and extended the relevant 2010 United Kingdom multi-criteria decision analysis, rating drug harms by criteria comprising health and social impacts to people who use drugs and their families, communities, and society.Methods Seventeen experts on drug use in the US, including three with lived experience of drug use and recovery, assessed 19 drugs across 18 criteria. Drugs were scored from 0 to 100 points on each criterion. Then, criteria were weighted to represent the experts' view of their relative importance, and each drug was assigned an overall harm score. We also created a numerical rating to represent Controlled Substances Act-defined harm.Results Fentanyl (scoring 90), methamphetamine (84), crack (83), and heroin (82) were the most harmful drugs. Cannabis (32) ranked in the middle, and mushrooms (3) were the least harmful. Drug-specific mortality and economic cost were the largest overall contributors to harm, while environmental damage was the smallest. The correlation between Controlled Substances Act-defined harm and experts' harm ratings was - 0.26.Conclusions These findings add to the growing international literature highlighting how drug policy contradicts expert assessments of drug harms across nations. To reduce these harms, public health strategies informed by evidence and expert input should be prioritized over punitive approaches.

प्रस्तुत लेख डडेल्धुरेली भाषामा रहेको लिङ्ग व्यवस्थाको अध्ययनमा आधारित रहेको छ । यस लेखमा गुणात्मक अनुसन्धानका आधारमा स्थलगत अवस्था अध्ययन विधिको प्रयोग गरिएको छ । डडेल्धुरेली भाषाको अध्ययन गर्दा मानवीय सामान्यार्थी पुलिङ्ग, मानवीय सामान्यार्थी स्त्रीलिङ्ग, मानवीय आदरार्थी मध्यम पुलिङ्ग, मानवीय आदरार्थी मध्यम स्त्रीलिङ्ग, मानवीय आदरार्थी उच्च पुलिङ्ग, मानवेतर जन्तुवाचक स्थूल पुलिङ्ग, मानवेतर जन्तुवाचक स्थूल स्त्रीलिङ्ग, मानवेतर जन्तुवाचक सूक्ष्म पुलिङ्ग, मानवेतर अजन्तुवाचक सङ्ख्येय पुलिङ्ग, मानवेतर अजन्तुवाचक सङ्ख्येय स्त्रीलिङ्ग, मानवेतर अजन्तुवाचक असङ्ख्येय पुलिङ्ग, मानवेतर अजन्तुवाचक असङ्ख्येय पुलिङ्ग गरी जम्मा बाह्र प्रकारको लिङ्ग व्यवस्था रहेको पाइन्छ । कतिपय शब्दहरू देख्दा इकारान्त देखिन्छन् तर ती इस्त्रीलिङ्गी नभएर पुलिङ्गी हुन्छन् । (जस्तैः अखजि रूख पड्यो) त्यसैले शब्दको रूप फरक देख्दैमा लिङ्गभेद गर्न सकिँदैन । रूपका आधारमा डडेल्धुरेली भाषामा लिङ्गभेद देखिँदैन । अर्थका आधारमा भाले हुँदैमा पुलिङ्ग र पोथी हुँदैमा स्त्रीलिङ्ग हुँदैन । जस्तै: डडेल्धुरेली भाषामा इजा शब्द उच्च आदरार्थीमा पुलिङ्ग हुन्छ । प्रायः अहिलेसम्म हाम्रो परम्पराले लिङ्गभेद भनेर भाले र पोथीलाई मात्रै मान्दै आएको छ । लिङ्गभेद भन्ने कुरा सजीव र निर्जीव या मानवीय र मानवेतर सजीव भए भाले पोथी छट्ट्याउने निर्जीव भए सबै नपुंसक हो भन्ने अहिलेसम्मको आम धारणा रहिआएको छ । तर डडेल्धुरेली भाषाको लिङ्ग व्यवस्था हेर्ने हो भने भाले हुँदैमा पुलिङ्गी र पोथी हुँदैमा स्त्रीलिङ्गी हुनेगरेको पाइँदैन । त्यसै गरी अजन्तुवाचक हुने वित्तिकै सबै नपुंसक पनि हुँदैनन् । डडेल्धुरेली भाषाको लिङ्गको अध्ययन गर्दा त्यो कुरा गलत देखिएको छ ।

Background: Lung cancer remains a leading cause of cancer-related mortality worldwide. In Malaysia, it ranks as the third most common cancer with a high proportion of late-stage diagnoses. Aims and Objectives: This study aimed to evaluate the clinical characteristics, molecular profiles, treatment strategies, and survival outcomes of lung cancer patients over a 5-year period in a private tertiary hospital. Materials and Methods: A retrospective cohort study was conducted at Beacon Hospital, Malaysia, involving patients diagnosed with pathologically confirmed primary lung cancer between January 2019 and December 2023. Demographic, clinical, and molecular data were extracted from medical records. Survival analysis was performed using the Kaplan–Meier method, focusing on patients with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations treated with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). Results: A total of 470 patients were included, with 55.5% being male and the majority aged 60–74 years. Adenocarcinoma was the most common histological subtype (75.9%) and 80.2% of cases were diagnosed at stage IV. Molecular profiling revealed that 204 patients had EGFR mutations, predominantly exon 19 deletions and exon 21 (L858R). Among patients treated with EGFR TKIs, second-generation agents (afatinib and dacomitinib) demonstrated the longest median survival (39 months) and highest 5-year survival rate (95.1%), followed by third-generation TKIs (osimertinib; 83.3%) and first-generation TKIs (erlotinib and gefitinib; 64.7%). Conclusion: The findings highlight the predominance of advanced-stage lung cancer in Malaysia and underscore the critical role of molecular profiling in guiding targeted therapies. Second-generation EGFR TKIs were associated with the most favorable survival outcomes, supporting their use in real-world clinical settings. This study contributes to the limited body of local evidence and may inform future strategies to improve lung cancer management in Malaysia.

<title>Abstract</title> <bold>Background</bold> The PUMA scale has shown good discrimination in identifying people with COPD in primary care. We evaluated the predictive performance of PUMA for opportunistic case-finding and assessed the prevalence of COPD in at-risk primary care patients in Singapore. <bold>Methods</bold> This is a multicentre cross-sectional study of participants aged ≥40 years and current/former smokers. Participants completed the PUMA scale and spirometry. Predictive performance of PUMA was assessed using AUC-ROC; optimal cutoff was determined by Youden’s index. <bold>Results</bold> 359 participants were included in final analysis; 12.5% had COPD confirmed on spirometry. PUMA showed acceptable discrimination with AUC-ROC of 0.75 (95% CI:0.67–0.83). Optimal cutoff maximising sensitivity and specificity was ≥5 (Se 62.2%, Sp 79.3%; PPV 30.1%, NPV 93.6%); cutoff of ≥4 increased sensitivity to 80.0% (Sp of 56.7%; PPV 20.9%, NPV 95.2%.) <bold>Conclusion</bold> The PUMA scale demonstrated acceptable predictive performance for opportunistic COPD case-finding in Singapore's primary care setting. A cutoff of ≥4 enhanced case identification.

Ergene’nin merkezine inşa edilen İmaret Külliyesi için Sultan II. Murad 1447 yılında bir vakıf kurmuştur. Vakfın gelirleri ve giderleri, kuruluşundan XVI. yüzyılın sonuna kadar bir artış sergilemiştir. Gelirlerin artışındaki en dikkat çeken gelişmeler, vakfa tabi iskân birimlerinin sayısının ve bu yerleşim yerlerindeki vergi nüfusunun çoğalması ile tarımsal üretimin fazlalaşmasının yanında Ergene ve Edirne şehir merkezlerinde bulunan vakıf akarlarının kira tutarlarının yükselmesi olmuştur. Öte yandan vakıf XVI. yüzyıl sonunda gelirlerini toplama noktasında da sorunlar yaşamış ve bazen uzun yıllar boyunca tahsilât gerçekleştirilememiştir. Giderlerin yükselmesinde ise, vakıf görevlilerinin, zevâid–horanların ve imaretin hayrından faydalananların sayısında yaşanan artış olmakla birlikte, XVI. yüzyılın sonunda imparatorluk sınırları içinde başta gıda olmak üzere diğer tüketim ürünlerinin yükselen fiyatları, vakfın hayrât ve akarlarının yıllar içerisinde yıpranmasına bağlı olarak artan tamirat masrafları gibi etkenler büyük paya sahiptir. Bu bağlamda çalışmada, imaret vakfının malî gücünün, görevlilerinin, hayrât ve akarlarının ve de gelir kaynaklarının XV. yüzyılın sonundaki ile 1592-1599 yılları arasındaki durumları karşılaştırılmıştır.

Early Childhood Mental Health Consultation (ECMHC) promotes children’s social–emotional development and reduces challenging behaviors in early care and education (ECE) centers, yet implementation barriers increase teacher stress and reduce confidence. Scalable, efficient, and accessible approaches are needed to meet ECE center demands. This quasi-experimental match-controlled study evaluated two ECMHC programs in promoting children’s social–emotional development and improving teachers’ skills/attitudes compared to an attention control condition in 22 ECE centers in lower-resourced areas of BLINDED. We compared Jump Start (JS; traditional human consultation model), Jump Start Go (JS Go; AI-enhanced consultation model), and Healthy Caregivers–Healthy Children (HC2; obesity-prevention consultation model). Child social–emotional development, teacher workplace stress/confidence, and classroom practices were assessed at pre-and post-intervention. Children in JS and JS Go interventions demonstrated significant social–emotional gains (F = 13.55, p &lt; 0.001), with the largest reductions in internalizing problems observed in children who received JS Go (−2.91 points; F = 9.65, p &lt; 0.001). JS Go classrooms also showed greater improvements in prosocial behavior (F = 5.05, p = 0.012) and resiliency (F = 8.95, p &lt; 0.001) than HC2 classrooms. Findings suggest that both traditional and AI-enhanced ECMHC approaches can promote teachers’ capacity to support children’s social–emotional development.

Purpose: To investigate the astigmatism distribution and axis patterns among Iraqi patients and explore its associations with age and gender. Study Design: Cross-sectional observational study. Place and Duration of Study: College of Medicine, University of Fallujah, Iraqfrom January to March 2024. Methods: A total of 112 patients (224 eyes) with astigmatism were included. Data included visual acuity, auto refraction, and astigmatism axis. Astigmatism was classified by magnitude and axis orientation. Statistical analysis was done using Chi-square test and Pearson's correlation test was used to assess association with age and gender. Results: Mild astigmatism was the most common (87.5%), followed by moderate (8.5%) and severe astigmatism(4%). With-the-rule (WTR) astigmatism was the predominant axis pattern (54.9%), with against-the-rule (ATR) and oblique astigmatism accounting for 39.3% and 5.8%, respectively. WTR astigmatism occurred more frequently in younger individuals, whereas ATR predominated in older patients (p &lt; 0.001). There was no significant association between axis type and gender (p = 0.992). Visual acuity improved in most cases after refractive correction,with 87.9% achieving normal vision. Conclusion: WTR astigmatism is more common in younger individuals, whereas ATR astigmatism becomes more prevalent with age. These findings highlight age-related changes in astigmatism patterns and provide valuable local data to guide refractive correction in Iraq.

Esta pesquisa tem como objetivo investigar a relação entre o Evangelho e a arte à luz da teologia de João Paulo II. Adotando uma abordagem qualitativa, com base na análise bibliográfica e documental, o estudo tem como principais fontes sua Carta aos Artistas (1999) e a obra Deus é a Beleza, que reúne os exercícios espirituais pregados por Karol Wojtyła a artistas em 1962. Para o pontífice, toda forma autêntica de arte constitui um caminho para acessar a realidade mais profunda do ser humano e do mundo. A relação entre Evangelho e arte se sustenta, primeiramente, na conexão entre Evangelho e beleza. O artista, em sua vocação, mantém um vínculo específico com a beleza, a qual remete, segundo João Paulo II, ao próprio Deus. A segunda dimensão dessa relação está no fato de que o Evangelho, ao longo da história, inspirou inúmeras expressões artísticas. O Deus do Evangelho é a Beleza, e essa beleza se comunica com a humanidade por meio da arte. Por fim, João Paulo II afirma que, mesmo sem ser artista no sentido estrito, todo ser humano é chamado a fazer da própria vida uma obra-prima, por ter sido criado à imagem e semelhança do Criador.

We are delighted to welcome the Journal of Interdisciplinary Research Applied to Medicine (JDReAM) [...]

The Editor, I am writing to highlight the urgent need for the implementation of a simple yet essential tool across the healthcare system of Pakistan: the Early Warning System (EWS). Vital signs are crucial indicators of general health and can predict both chronic disorders and acute deterioration in a patient's condition. Monitoring these vital signs is a fundamental part of hospital care and observation. Early warning systems have evolved from vital signs charts, allowing for the early identification of patients at risk of serious deterioration before they collapse. These systems, tailored to patients' clinical needs, such as maternal early warning systems and national early warning systems, are widely used in developed countries. They enable timely detection and intervention, preventing severe acute morbidity and mortality. This not only improves patient survival but also prevents the loss of millions of dollars in managing critically ill patients when it is already too late. Early detection boosts the morale of patients and their families and fosters trust in the healthcare system. Despite their proven benefits, early warning systems are not widely used in developing countries like Pakistan, where national guidelines for such systems are non-existent. As a result, healthcare professionals often rely on their personal knowledge and experience to determine when to alert specialist or intensivist care, leading to inconsistencies in patient care. There is a pressing need to establish national consensus guidelines for early warning systems in Pakistan. These guidelines should ensure that the EWS adopted nationwide is uniform, with similar triggers and only slight variations to cater to different physiological patient groups. Implementing such a system would bring significant improvements to our healthcare settings, leading to better patient outcomes and more efficient call management systems. I urge policymakers to prioritize the development and adoption of national guidelines for early warning systems. This will ensure that all healthcare professionals are aware of and can effectively use these systems, ultimately improving the quality and safety of healthcare in Pakistan. Sincerely, Dr. Qudsia Nawaz References: 1. Smith ME, Chiovaro JC, O'Neil M, Kansagara D, Quinones AR, Freeman M, et al. Early warning system scores for clinical deterioration in hospitalized patients: a systematic review. Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2014;11(9):1454-65. 2. Subbe CP, Kruger M, Rutherford P, Gemmel L. Validation of a modified Early Warning Score in medical admissions. QJM. 2001;94(10):521-6. 3. Gao H, McDonnell A, Harrison DA, Moore T, Adam S, Daly K, et al. Systematic review and evaluation of physiological track and trigger warning systems for identifying at-risk patients on the ward. Intensive Care Med. 2007;33(4):667-79. 4. Royal College of Physicians. National Early Warning Score (NEWS) 2: Standardising the assessment of acute-illness severity in the NHS. Updated report of a working party. London: RCP; 2017. 5. Alam N, Hobbelink EL, van Tienhoven AJ, van de Ven PM, Jansma EP, Nanayakkara PW. The impact of the use of the Early Warning Score (EWS) on patient outcomes: a systematic review. Resuscitation. 2014;85(5):587-94. 6. Ludikhuize J, Smorenburg SM, de Rooij SE, de Jonge E. Identification of deteriorating patients on general wards; measurement of vital parameters and potential effectiveness of the Modified Early Warning Score. J Crit Care. 2012;27(4):424.e7-13. 7. McNeill G, Bryden D. Do either early warning systems or emergency response teams improve hospital patient survival? A systematic review. Resuscitation. 2013;84(12):1652-67. 8. Kellett J, Sebat F. Make vital signs great again - A call for action. Eur J Intern Med. 2017;45:13-9. 9. Kyriacos U, Jelsma J, Jordan S. Monitoring vital signs using early warning scoring systems: a review of the literature. J Nurs Manag. 2011;19(3):311-30. 10. Morgan RJ, Williams F, Wright MM. An early warning scoring system for detecting developing critical illness. Clin Intensive Care. 1997;8(2):100. 11. Smith GB, Prytherch DR, Schmidt PE, Featherstone PI. Review and performance evaluation of aggregate weighted 'track and trigger' systems. Resuscitation. 2008;77(2):170-9. 12. Jones DA, DeVita MA, Bellomo R. Rapid-response teams. N Engl J Med. 2011;365(2):139-46. 13. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Acutely ill adults in hospital: recognising and responding to deterioration. NICE clinical guideline 50. London: NICE; 2007. 14. Vincent JL, Einav S, Pearse R, Jaber S, Kranke P, Overdyk FJ, et al. Improving detection of patient deterioration in the general hospital ward environment. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2018;35(5):325-33.

Bu kitap bölümü, padel vuruşlarını biyomekanik ve kinematik ilkeler doğrultusunda inceleyerek teknik performansın bilimsel temeller üzerinden nasıl geliştirilebileceğini ortaya koymaktadır. Tenis, squash ve raketbolun bazı yapısal özelliklerini bünyesinde barındıran padel, topun duvarlardan sekerek oyunda kalabilmesi sayesinde yüksek düzeyde taktiksel ve teknik uyum gerektiren özgün bir spor dalı olarak öne çıkmaktadır. Bu durum, sporcuların yalnızca teknik becerilerini değil, aynı zamanda biyomekanik yeterliliklerini de belirleyici hâle getirmektedir. Bölümde, padel performansının değerlendirilmesinde kullanılan güncel biyomekanik analiz yöntemlerine odaklanılmaktadır. Üç boyutlu hareket analiz sistemleri, yüzeyel elektromiyografi ve ataletsel ölçüm birimleri gibi teknolojilerin sağladığı veriler, vuruş mekaniklerinin ayrıntılı biçimde çözümlenmesine olanak tanımaktadır. Özellikle optoelektronik sistemler aracılığıyla elde edilen yüksek çözünürlüklü kinematik veriler, karmaşık hareket örüntülerinin nesnel olarak değerlendirilmesini mümkün kılmaktadır. Padel vuruşlarının temelinde yer alan kinetik zincir mekanizması, enerjinin vücut segmentleri arasında proksimalden distale doğru aktarılmasını sağlayarak raket başı hızının artmasında kritik rol oynamaktadır. Bu çerçevede forehand, backhand, servis, voley, bandeja, vibora ve smaç vuruşlarının eklem açıları, kas aktivasyon düzenleri ve raket kinematiği karşılaştırmalı olarak ele alınmaktadır. Elektromiyografi bulguları, üst ekstremitedeki kas aktivasyon dengesizliklerinin özellikle dirsek ve omuz yaralanmaları açısından risk oluşturduğunu göstermektedir. Ayrıca smaç vuruşlarında raket başı hızının üst vücut gücü, kavrama kuvveti ve omuz rotasyon kapasitesiyle yakından ilişkili olduğu ortaya konmaktadır. Teknik optimizasyon kapsamında, giyilebilir teknolojiler ve akıllı kort sistemlerinin antrenman süreçlerine entegrasyonu ile modern ekipman tasarımında kullanılan kompozit malzemelerin performansa katkısı değerlendirilmektedir. Bununla birlikte, biyomekanik verilere dayalı fiziksel kondisyon programlarının performans artışı kadar yaralanma riskinin azaltılmasında da önemli bir rol oynadığı vurgulanmaktadır. Bölüm, omuz, dirsek ve alt ekstremiteye özgü biyomekanik risk faktörlerini ele alarak, antrenörler ve sporcular için kanıta dayalı ve bütüncül bir yaklaşım sunmaktadır.

Aim This study aimed to evaluate the knowledge and awareness of dental students regarding digital dentistry including CAD/CAM systems, 3D-printing technologies, and intraoral scanning. Material and method A descriptive cross-sectional survey was conducted among undergraduate dental students at Biruni University Faculty of Dentistry. The questionnaire consisted of three main sections: demographics, knowledge and awareness of digital dentistry applications. Data were analyzed using descriptive statistics and chi-square tests to determine associations between student’s study level and their level of digital dentistry awareness. Results Of the 307 respondents, 63.8% were female and 36.2% male, mostly aged 20–24 years. Preclinical students represented 74.9% and clinical students 25.1% of participants. General awareness of digital technology in dentistry was 58.5%, while knowledge of CAD/CAM applications (32.7%) and virtual articulators (30.7%) remained limited. Over 70% of students could not identify materials or file formats used in 3D printing or CAD/CAM workflows. A significant relationship was observed between the year of study and digital awareness (χ² = 29.651, p &lt; 0.001), indicating that clinical students were significantly more familiar with digital systems than preclinical students. Conclusion Dental students demonstrated moderate awareness but limited practical knowledge of digital dentistry. Clinical exposure enhanced familiarity with CAD/CAM and 3D-printing technologies. These findings highlight the need for integrating structured digital dentistry education earlier in the dental curriculum to improve technological competence and readiness for modern clinical practice.

Latar belakang : Persalinan merupakan proses alami yang melibatkan mekanisme fisiologis dan psikologis. Namun, persalinan dapat menyebabkan nyeri yang signifikan pada ibu bersalin, yang dapat berdampak pada proses persalinan dan kesehatan ibu. Lamaze Breathing Exercise merupakan salah satu metode non-farmakologi yang dapat digunakan untuk mengurangi nyeri persalinan. Metode ini melibatkan teknik pernapasan yang dapat membantu mengurangi rasa sakit dan meningkatkan kenyamanan ibu bersalin. Tujuan: Penatalaksanaan teknik lamaze breathing exercise Terhadap Nyeri Kala 1 Pada Ibu Bersalin di Ruang Kebidanan Siti Walidah Rumah Sakit Muhammadiyah Palembang. Metode: Penelitian ini menggunakan metode studi kasus pada Ny.M dan Ny.S yang mengalami nyeri persalinan, studi kasus dilakukan selama 3 hari pada tanggal 18-21 Mei 2025. Hasil: Setelah dilakukan prosedur teknik lamaze breathing exercise saat kontraksi persalinan kala I, dapat mengontrol rasa nyeri, skala nyeri NRS pada Ny.M sebelum diberikan intervensi yaitu 5 menjadi skor 4 setelah diberikan intervensi, dan pada Ny.S sebelum diberikan intervensi yaitu 6 menjadi skor 4 setelah diberikan intervensi. Simpulan: Penatalaksanaan prosedur lamaze breathing exercise terhadap penurunan kontrol nyeri ibu bersalin kala I yang akan menghadapi persalinan normal spontan. Saran: Menganjurkan ibu melakukan prosedur lamaze breathing exercise saat kontraksi bersalin dari pembukaan 1-lengkap.

Terörle ilgili hemen hemen tüm çalışmalarda vurgulanan ilk sorun, terörizmin herkes tarafından kabul edilmiş tutarlı bir tanımının olmayışıdır. Değişen bakış açısına göre terörizm, yaşanan bir krizden olumsuz etkilenen taraf, destekleyen taraf ya da direkt aktif destekçi olmak gibi farklı şekillerde kavramsallaştırılabilmektedir. CEPOL'ün hazırladığı seminer çıktılarına göre dünya çapındaki terörist grupların üçte birinden fazlası etnik/ayrılıkçı azınlıklar adına hareket yürütmektedir. Saldırı ve can kayıplarının sayısına bakılırsa etnik terörizm, ideolojik terörizmin aksine oldukça yaygın görünüyor. Yirminci yüzyılın ilk zamanlarından bu yana etnik meseleler her coğrafyada sorun olagelmiştir. Bir takım etnik terörist gruplar AB ülkelerinde uzun süredir varlığını sürdürmüş ya da varlığını sürdürmektedir. Bazı etnik/ayrılıkçı terörist grupların isyanlarından vazgeçmesi, bazılarının ise daha da gelişerek faaliyetlerine hız kazandırması kaynak ülke tarafından tasarlanan planların ve uygulanan politikadaki farklılıkların ne denli önemli olduğunu göstermektedir. ETA, IRA, PIRA ve ASALA gibi etnik terör gruplarının gelişme süreçlerine bakıldığında bu daha net bir şekilde karşımıza çıkmaktadır. Avrupa'da terör örgütlerinin yaşadığı değişim ve dönüşüm, güvenlik kavramlarının da değişimini tetiklemiştir. Bu nedenle uluslararası iş birliğini gerektiren teröre karşı mücadele politikalarının yeniden formüle edilmesine ihtiyaç duyulmuştur. Bu çalışmada öncelikli amaç, küreselleşmeyle birlikte etkileri daha kalıcı boyutlara ulaşan terör konusuna literatürü göz önünde tutarak genel bir bakış sunmak, sorunun tarihsel gelişimini ve boyutlarını analiz etmektir. Etnik meseleleri temel alarak, Avrupa Birliği'nde çözüm ve önerilerle konuya ilişkin politikaların geliştirilip uygulanabileceği bir çerçeve sunmaktadır. Araştırmada "Avrupa'da yüzlerce yıldır var olan ve terör boyutuna ulaşan ırksal sorunlar nelerdir?, AB içerisinde varlığını, yapısını ve önemini tartışan ulus devletler ile etnik gruplar arasındaki ilişkiler küreselleşme süreçlerinin etkisiyle nasıl değişmiştir?, Etnik terörist grupları motive eden şey nedir?" sorusuna yanıt vermek amaçlanmıştır. Çalışmada birincil ve ikincil verilerin analizini içeren nitel bir metodoloji kullanılmıştır. Bu amaçla öncelikle etnik terörizme ilişkin literatür incelenerek etnik krizlerin terörizm türleri içerisindeki özgünlüğü vurgulanmıştır. Daha sonra AB’nin terörle mücadele politikası, bu alanda oluşturduğu kurumlar ve ilgili AB mevzuatına kısaca yer verilmiştir.

Pediatric acute respiratory distress syndrome (PARDS) complicated by ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) poses significant management challenges, particularly when caused by multidrug-resistant organisms such as Stenotrophomonas maltophilia and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. A frequent and deleterious complication is plate-like atelectasis, which may prove refractory to conservative management due to anatomical constraints in the pediatric airway and biofilm formation. A 23-month-old male presented with severe PARDS and polymicrobial VAP. Despite extubation to High-Flow Nasal Cannula (HFNC), the patient developed persistent right upper lobe plate-like atelectasis refractory to aggressive physiotherapy and targeted antibiotic therapy with Levofloxacin and Ceftazidime for 21 days. On Day 75 of illness, a flexible bronchoscopy was performed. Intraoperative findings revealed hyperemic mucosa without macroscopic mucus plugging. However, the procedure, involving saline lavage and suctioning, resulted in immediate recruitment. Within 24 hours, the respiratory rate decreased from 45 to 24 breaths per minute, and the SpO2/FiO2 ratio improved significantly from 185 to 310, allowing weaning from respiratory support. In conclusion, in toddlers with multidrug-resistant VAP, atelectasis may persist due to biofilm-mediated micro-obstruction rather than macroscopic plugging. Flexible bronchoscopy is a safe and effective therapeutic adjunct in these cases, facilitating distal airway recruitment and breaking the cycle of chronic infection.

Amaç: Serviks kanseri taraması, kadın hastalıkları polikliniklerinde rutin olarak uygulanan bir işlemdir. Her ne kadar smear testi jinekologlar açısından basit bir işlem olsa da, hastalar bu süreçte anksiyete yaşayabilmektedir. Bu çalışmanın amacı, smear testi öncesinde ve sırasında uygulanan müzik müdahalesinin hastaların işlem sırasındaki ve sonrasındaki ağrı ve anksiyete düzeylerine olan tamamlayıcı etkisini değerlendirmektir. Gereç ve Yöntemler: Bu randomize kontrollü çalışmaya, smear testi yapılacak olan ve Türkçe konuşan, 30 yaş üzeri 160 kadın dahil edilmiştir. Katılımcılar rastgele müzik ve kontrol grubu olmak üzere ikiye ayrılmıştır. İşlem sırasında, hasta ve hekim arasındaki iletişimi korumak amacıyla hoparlör sistemi aracılığıyla müzik çalınmış ya da müzik çalınmamıştır. Anksiyete ve ağrı düzeyleri, işlem öncesi ve sonrası Devlet-Sürekli Kaygı Envanteri (STAI) ve Görsel Analog Skala (VAS) ile değerlendirilmiştir. Bulgular: Çalışmaya toplam 160 hasta dahil edilmiştir; 80’i müzik grubunda, 80’i kontrol grubundadır. Müzik grubundaki ortalama STAI skoru 36 (SD = 13) iken, kontrol grubunda 41 (SD = 17) olarak saptanmıştır (p = 0,042). STAI skorlarına göre, kontrol grubundaki 28 hastada (%35) yüksek düzeyde anksiyete saptanırken, müzik grubunda bu sayı yalnızca 15 (%19) olarak bulunmuştur. Benzer şekilde, işlem sonrası yapılan değerlendirmede müzik grubunda VAS skorları anlamlı derecede daha düşüktür (4,3’e karşı 2,7, p = 0,001). Sonuç: Çalışmamız, jinekolojik muayene ve smear testi sırasında uygulanan müzik terapisinin anksiyete ve ağrıyı azaltabileceğini göstermektedir. İnvaziv olmayan bu yöntem, zararlı bir etkisi bulunmayan, düşük riskli, maliyeti düşük ve uygulanması kolay tamamlayıcı bir müdahale olarak değerlendirilebilir.

Diarrhea is an infectious disease in the gastrointestinal tract as a result of poor environmental sanitation and personal hygiene so that it can attack and kill all ages, but cases of diarrhea in children and infants can be at risk of causing death. Research purposes to analyze the relationship between the Level of Knowledge and Handwashing Behavior to the incidence of diarrhea in elementary students in the Puskesmas I area of West Denpasar. This research design uses quantitative descriptive with a cross-sectional approach. The total sample was 101 respondents using random sampling techniques. The data collection tool used was a questionnaire sheet. This research uses the Chi-Square test. Research Results: The Hand Washing Behavior variable has a significant relationship with the incidence of diarrhea because the results of the P-value show results &lt;0.05, and have a 3.075 greater influence on the incidence of diarrhea. The conclusion from this research is The Hand Washing Behavior variable has a significant relationship with the incidence of diarrhea because the results of the P-value show results &lt;0.05, and have a 3.075 greater influence on the incidence of diarrhea.

Introduction. Modern transformational processes in the higher education system, driven by globalization, digitalization, and the growing demand for practice-oriented competencies, actualize the need to update approaches to the training of specialists in therapy and rehabilitation. Aim. The aim of the study is to theoretically substantiate and empirically verify the the didactic conditions for organizing the search and research activities of bachelor students in therapy and rehabilitation under the conditions of RBL. Materials and methods. The experiment was conducted during the period of 2024–2025 at Poltava State Medical University, with the participation of students of the first (bachelor’s) level of higher education majoring in 227 Therapy and Rehabilitation, specialization 227.02 Occupational Therapy (72 students); as well as 12 instructors who teach disciplines of the relevant educational program. A number of professional disciplines were selected for the experiment «Digital Technologies in Healthcare», «Fundamentals of Health Theory and Healthy Lifestyle», «Art Therapy», which the students studied within the framework of the implementation of RBL and the evidence-based approach. Results. The analysis of changes in the levels of research competence formation among bachelor students in therapy and rehabilitation indicates positive dynamics in the medium and high levels across all four components, along with a decrease in the proportion of students with a low level. Research activity: the share of students with a low level decreased by 25.68%, while the medium and high levels increased by 18.92% and 6.76%, respectively. Formation of research skills: there was a decrease in the low level by 18.92% and an increase in the medium and high levels by 9.46% each. Development of professional and creative potential: a decrease in the low level by 13.51% and an increase in the medium and high levels by 6.76% each indicates the effectiveness of implementing creative methods during practical classes. Conclusions. The overall trend demonstrates the positive effect of the didactic conditions on the formation of research competence among bachelor students in therapy and rehabilitation. The reduction in the proportion of students with a low level and the increase in the medium and high levels confirm the effectiveness of the didactic conditions for organizing search and research work of bachelor students in therapy and rehabilitation.

Background: Filler-induced vascular occlusion remains a rare but serious complication in aesthetic medicine, particularly in the lips, where collateral circulation is limited. Polynucleotide (DOT-PN) is a polynucleotide-based medical device primarily characterized by its hydration capacity and viscoelastic properties. When administered intradermally, PN provides structural support to the extracellular matrix (ECM) and contributes to the optimization of the local tissue microenvironment. Such ECM-level modulation may create conditions favorable for tissue stabilization and secondary vascular recovery following ischemic injury. Methods: We report a case involving a 41-year-old woman with upper lip necrosis following hyaluronic acid filler injection. Initial treatment with hyaluronidase partially alleviated ischemia but failed to prevent necrosis. Polynucleotide (DOT-PN; a polynucleotide-based medical device; PharmaResearch Co.,Ltd.; Seoul, Republic of Korea)) was administered intradermally in 4 sessions at 8-hour intervals (q8h×4), alongside conservative wound care. Results: Clinical improvement was observed within 36 hours of the first PN injection. The lesion demonstrated progressive improvement in tissue color, epithelial continuity, and surface integrity over a 4-week period, with no scarring or adverse events. Patient-reported satisfaction was rated 9 out of 10, with minimal pain and no functional sequelae during follow-up. Conclusion: Further controlled studies are warranted to define optimal PN dosing intervals, timing of administration, and comparative effectiveness versus other adjunctive treatments for filler-induced ischemic complications.

Fabry disease (FD) is an X-linked inherited lysosomal disorder secondary to the deficiency of the alpha-galactosidase A enzyme. Reduced alpha-galactosidase activity results in the accumulation of globotriaosylceramide in cells, leading to progressive organ damage and reduced life expectancy. We hereby present a case of a young male suffering from a burning sensation over his extremities for the past 10 years. He developed red, raised, pinhead-sized lesions over his body gradually over the last 8 years and was referred to the dermatology outpatient department from a neurologist. Incidentally, the patient was diagnosed with angiokeratoma corporis diffusum on the basis of examination, dermoscopy, and histopathology, and a diagnosis of Fabry’s disease was contemplated. Alpha-galactosidase enzyme levels were within normal limits, and gene testing was recommended, which the patient could not afford. A diagnosis of Fabry’s disease was established based on strong clinical suspicion and histopathological findings. This case highlights that clinical symptoms of Fabry’s disease can manifest even with normal enzyme levels and no family history.

Purpose: This study aimed to examine research trends and thematic keyword networks in disaster nursing competency literature published up to September 15, 2024. Methods: A retrospective descriptive design was used to analyze English-language articles retrieved from five databases (CINAHL, Cochrane, Embase, PubMed, and Web of Science) through September 15, 2024. Following PRISMA guidelines, 256 articles and 1,318 keywords were extracted. NetMiner 4.0 was used for keyword preprocessing and analysis. Word clouds and text network analyses were performed. Degree and betweenness centralities were calculated to determine keyword prominence and network roles. Results: Annual publications increased notably after 2020, coinciding with the COVID-19 pandemic. Studies originated from 32 countries, with the United States, China, and Iran leading. Cross-sectional quantitative (34.0%) and qualitative studies (26.6%) were the most commonly used study designs. From 44 high-frequency keywords, “nurses,” “preparedness,” “competency,” and “disaster nursing” ranked highest in both centrality measures. “Education” and “management” also showed strong centralities. Cluster analysis revealed that preparedness and response phases were emphasized more than mitigation and recovery. Conclusion: This study provides a comprehensive visualization of disaster nursing competency research. Findings highlight the dominance of preparedness-focused studies, limited exploration of mitigation and recovery. Future research should prioritize broader disaster phases, standardize terminology, and conduct evidence-based intervention studies to strengthen disaster nursing practice and education.

Apelin-13 attenuated brain injury after ICH by suppressing microglia-mediated neuroinflammation through APJ receptor-dependent inhibition of the JAK2/STAT3 pathway.

<ns3:p>Background Abnormal uterine bleeding (AUB) in premenopausal women is frequent, yet distinguishing benign from malignant causes remains clinically challenging. Endometrial thickness (ET) measured by transvaginal ultrasound (TVUS) is well established in postmenopausal bleeding but less validated in premenopausal women due to cyclical variations. This study aimed to assess the diagnostic accuracy and prognostic value of ET, supplemented by Kaplan–Meier survival analysis, in predicting endometrial malignancy among premenopausal women with AUB. Methods We conducted a retrospective analytical study including premenopausal women presenting with AUB at Charles Nicolle Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia (2016–2024). All underwent TVUS followed by endometrial sampling (hysteroscopy or curettage) and definitive histological confirmation on hysterectomy specimens. Sonographic features were described using International Endometrial Tumor Analysis (IETA) criteria. Diagnostic performance of ET was evaluated using receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis. Kaplan-Meir survival analysis was applied to time-to-consultation and time-to-diagnosis, not survival outcomes. Results ROC analysis identified ET as the strongest predictor of endometrial malignancy (AUC = 0.842, p &lt; 0.001). An optimal cutoff of &gt;9 mm achieved 69.2% sensitivity, 87.1% specificity, and a negative predictive value of 97.7%, effectively ruling out malignancy in patients with ET ≤9 mm. Although the positive predictive value was modest (26.5%), ET reliably stratified risk for further invasive evaluation. Kaplan–Meier analysis demonstrated that ET &gt;9 mm was associated with earlier consultation (mean 27.7 vs. 70.3 months, p &lt; 0.0001) and shorter time-to-diagnosis (median 12 months vs. not reached, p &lt; 0.0001), reflecting a more aggressive clinical course. Conclusions ET &gt;9 mm is a robust, non-invasive potential prognostic marker in premenopausal AUB, identifying high-risk women requiring urgent evaluation while safely excluding malignancy in low-risk patients.</ns3:p>

การวิจัยครั้งนี้มีวัตถุประสงค์เพื่อพัฒนาโปรแกรมสร้างเสริมความฉลาดทางอารมณ์และความฉลาดทางสังคมสำหรับนักศึกษามหาวิทยาลัย มีวิธีการดำเนินการวิจัยคือ ขั้นที่ 1 ศึกษาเอกสาร ตำรา และงานวิจัยที่เกี่ยวข้องกับความฉลาดทางอารมณ์และความฉลาดทางสังคม ทฤษฎีการกำกับอารมณ์ และแนวคิดทักษะชีวิต ขั้นที่ 2 วิเคราะห์และสรุปผลข้อมูล ขั้นที่ 3 สร้างและพัฒนาโปรแกรมสร้างเสริมความฉลาดทางอารมณ์และความฉลาดทางสังคมสำหรับนักศึกษามหาวิทยาลัย และขั้นที่ 4 ตรวจสอบความตรงเชิงเนื้อหาจากผู้ทรงคุณวุฒิ 5 ท่าน จากนั้นปรับปรุงโปรแกรมแล้วนำไปทดลองใช้กับนักศึกษาที่มีระดับความฉลาดทางอารมณ์และความฉลาดทางสังคมน้อยกว่าคนทั่วไป จำนวน 10 คน แล้วนำมาปรับปรุงอีกครั้งให้มีความสมบูรณ์ ผลการวิจัย พบว่า 1. องค์ประกอบความฉลาดทางอารมณ์และความฉลาดทางสังคมของนักศึกษา ประกอบด้วย การตระหนักรู้ตนเอง การตระหนักรู้สังคม การมีสัมพันธภาพ และการจัดการอารมณ์ตนเอง และทฤษฎีการกำกับอารมณ์ร่วมกับแนวคิดทักษะชีวิตมีความเหมาะสมที่จะนำมาเป็นพื้นฐานในการพัฒนาโปรแกรมสร้างเสริมความฉลาดทางอารมณ์และความฉลาดทางสังคมสำหรับนักศึกษามหาวิทยาลัย 2. องค์ประกอบของกิจกรรมโปรแกรม ประกอบด้วยชื่อกิจกรรม วัตถุประสงค์ แนวความคิด ขั้นตอนในการดำเนินกิจกรรม สื่อการเรียนรู้ 3. กิจกรรมโปรแกรมที่พัฒนาขึ้นมี 10 กิจกรรม ระยะเวลาการจัดโปรแกรม 6 สัปดาห์ สัปดาห์ละ 3 วัน วันละ 1 ชั่วโมง และ 4. โปรแกรมที่พัฒนาขึ้น มีค่าความตรงเชิงเนื้อหาองค์ประกอบของกิจกรรม เท่ากับ 1.00 กิจกรรมทั้ง 10 กิจกรรม มีค่าดัชนีความสอดคล้องเฉลี่ย เท่ากับ 0.94 และการจัดกิจกรรมโปรแกรม มีค่าดัชนีความสอดคล้องเฉลี่ย เท่ากับ 1.00

Diabetic kidney disease (DKD) is a major microvascular complication of diabetes and a leading cause of end-stage renal disease worldwide. Despite advances in metabolic and blood pressure control, the prevalence of DKD continues to rise, creating a significant clinical and socioeconomic burden. Recent studies have revealed that non-coding RNAs, particularly microRNAs (miRNAs), play an important role in the development and progression of DKD. Distinct patterns of miRNA dysregulation have been identified in specific renal cell types, including podocytes, mesangial cells, tubular epithelial cells, endothelial cells, fibroblasts, and macrophages. These alterations drive characteristic cellular injuries such as podocyte loss, mesangial matrix expansion, tubular epithelial–mesenchymal transition, endothelial dysfunction, and interstitial fibrosis. Certain miRNAs, such as miR-21, miR-192, and miR-214, reinforce profibrotic TGF-β/Smad signaling, whereas protective groups, including the miR-29 and miR-30 families, maintain epithelial stability and restrict matrix deposition. Beyond their regulatory roles, circulating and urinary miRNAs have emerged as stable, non-invasive biomarkers that reflect renal injury and disease progression. This review summarizes recent progress in elucidating cell-specific miRNA networks in DKD and highlights their potential as diagnostic indicators and therapeutic targets for precision management of diabetic kidney disease.

Abstract Objective Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is an urgent global health threat, resulting in more than 5 million deaths globally in 2019. Timely and complete antimicrobial agent (AMA) clinical trial results reporting is essential to evaluate the safety and efficacy of investigational therapies. The Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act (FDAAA) of 2007 mandated results reporting for applicable clinical trials to ClinicalTrials.gov . After nearly ten years of underreporting, the HHS issued the Final Rule, requiring a designated responsible party to submit results to ClinicalTrials.gov and clarifying applicable clinical trial (ACT) criteria. ACTs and probable ACTs (pACTs) are interventional studies regulated by the FDA with at least one site based in the United States. However, pACTs were initiated prior to January 2017, when the Final Rule came into effect. This study investigates the compliance and timeliness of results reporting of ACTs and probable ACTs (pACTs) for AMAs. Design We extracted data from ClinicalTrials.gov for trials involving AMAs with primary completion dates between May 1, 2013, and May 1, 2023. We analyzed the time from primary completion to results reporting and estimated the hazard ratio to compare timeliness between ACTs and pACTs. Additionally, we assessed delays in reporting across different study types and funding sources. Results Our search resulted in 2629 NCT records. After exclusion of ineligible trials, we included 2525 trials. We found 1769 pACTs (70.1%; 95% CI, 69.3%-72.9%) and 756 ACTs (29.9%; 95% CI, 28.2%-31.8%). Among the 2525 eligible trials, 2249 trials (89.1%; 95% CI, 87.8%-90.2%) were reported on ClinicalTrials.gov or in journal publications. Overall, 81.3% (95% CI, 79.7%-82.3%) of trials were reported late or missing (75.0% of ACTs vs 83.6% of pACTs). ACTs were more likely to report results earlier than pACTs, with a hazard ratio of 1.4 (95% CI, 1.3-1.5). Conclusions ACTs demonstrated greater reporting compliance and shorter delays in the reporting of overdue results. While this analysis provides initial insights, limitations related to timeline and sample scope suggest that broader investigations are needed to fully evaluate the impact of the Final Rule.

Rendahnya literasi kesehatan mental di masyarakat masih menjadi tantangan yang berdampak pada minimnya kesadaran, tingginya stigma, dan rendahnya kecenderungan untuk mencari bantuan profesional. Kegiatan pengabdian masyarakat ini bertujuan untuk meningkatkan pemahaman mengenai kesehatan mental melalui psikoedukasi berbasis media digital yang dinilai lebih efektif dalam menjangkau audiens secara luas, cepat, dan interaktif. Metode pelaksanaan terdiri atas tahapan need assessment untuk mengidentifikasi isu yang dibutuhkan, diikuti intervensi psikoedukasi melalui konten digital, serta evaluasi dengan desain pre-test dan post-test yang diberikan kepada 28 peserta. Hasil menunjukkan adanya peningkatan pengetahuan dan pemahaman signifikan terkait konsep kesehatan mental, indikator gangguan, strategi coping, serta peningkatan sikap positif terhadap penggunaan layanan bantuan profesional. Peserta menunjukkan kemampuan memahami kesehatan mental secara lebih komprehensif setelah intervensi diberikan. Temuan ini memperlihatkan bahwa psikoedukasi berbasis media digital merupakan strategi efektif dalam meningkatkan literasi kesehatan mental dan mendorong perilaku preventif. Oleh karena itu, program edukasi serupa perlu dikembangkan secara berkelanjutan untuk memperkuat kesadaran masyarakat serta meminimalkan stigma terhadap isu kesehatan mental.

Mục tiêu: Xác định tỷ lệ tiền đái tháo đường và phân tích một số yếu tố liên quan trên người bệnh tăng huyết áp tại Trung tâm Tim mạch Bệnh viện Đa khoa Tỉnh Hải Dương từ tháng 02/2024 – 04/2024. Phương pháp: Mô tả cắt ngang có phân tích. Kết quả nghiên cứu: Đa số người bệnh có độ tuổi trên 75 (47,3%), Giới tính nữ (47,3%), nghề nghiệp hưu trí (45,5), Trình độ trung cấp, cao đẳng, đại học (46,4%), BMI bình thường (59,1%), có hoạt động thể lực (60%) và không có tiền sử gia đình có người đái tháo đường (0,9%); Tỉ lệ người bệnh mắc tiền đái tháo đường theo Glucose lúc đói là 33,6%; Tỉ lệ người bệnh mắc tiền đái tháo đường theo HbA1c là 55,5%; Tỉ lệ người bệnh mắc tiền đái tháo đường theo Glucose lúc đói hoặc HbA1c là 58,2%; Không có mối liên quan giữa các yếu tố tuổi, giới, BMI, ít hoạt động thể lực, tiền sử gia đình có người mắc đái tháo đường với tiền đái tháo đường trên người bệnh tăng huyết áp Kết luận: Tỉ lệ người bệnh mắc tiền đái tháo đường theo Glucose lúc đói hoặc HbA1c là 58,2%; Không có mối liên quan giữa các yếu tố tuổi, giới, BMI, ít hoạt động thể lực, tiền sử gia đình có người mắc đái tháo đường với tiền đái tháo đường trên người bệnh tăng huyết áp.

Areca catechu&nbsp;L. (A. catechu) or areca nut contains the main phytochemical compounds arecoline and catechin.&nbsp;It also possesses high antioxidant properties and can be used as a medication. Thus, this study was conducted to compare the therapeutic effects of 2% A. catechu&nbsp;gel and 0.1% triamcinolone acetonide on recurrent aphthous stomatitis (RAS). Overall, 46 randomly selected patients were divided into A. catechu&nbsp;gel and triamcinolone acetonide treatment groups. The topical preparations were applied to oral lesions three times daily in each group. Ulcer diameter, discoloration, pain intensity, and quality of life were assessed for 7 days, with ulcer size and pain intensity analyzed on day 7.&nbsp;Consequently, the A. catechu&nbsp;gel and triamcinolone acetonide demonstrated therapeutic effects after 7 days of treatment. The topical treatments examined did not show a significant difference in alleviating pain and reducing erythema associated with the ulcer. Furthermore, no correlation was found between ulcer diameter and pain intensity in A. catechu&nbsp;and triamcinolone acetonide. Areca catechu&nbsp;gel promoted RAS healing owing to its analgesic and anti-inflammatory properties.

ABSTRACT This systematic review and meta‐analysis (CRD420251006746) investigated the impact of inhaled β 2 ‐adrenoceptor (AR) agonists (IBA) with exemption according to the World Anti‐Doping Agency (WADA) 2025 list on athletic performance, respiratory, and cardiovascular outcomes. A key subgroup analysis focused on IBA administered within WADA 2025 permitted dose intervals. Findings indicate that IBA significantly improved sprint time by 0.30 s (95% CI 0.52–0.07) overall, and by 0.27 s (95% CI 0.50–0.05) in healthy subjects, with long‐acting β 2 ‐AR agonists yielding a 0.49 s (95% CI 0.81–0.17) improvement. These sprint time enhancements persisted even at WADA‐permitted doses. Blood lactate levels significantly increased by 0.67 mmol/L (95% CI 0.19–1.14) overall and by 0.65 mmol/L (95% CI 0.17–1.14) in healthy subjects, though this effect was not significant at WADA‐permitted doses. IBA significantly improved forced expiratory volume in 1 s by 0.19 L (95% CI 0.14–0.23) and forced expiratory flow between 25% and 75% by 0.40 L/s (95% CI 0.24–0.56), with lung function improvements confirmed at WADA‐permitted doses. Heart rate significantly increased by 1.40 bpm (95% CI 0.32–2.48). IBA did not influence aerobic performance. When administered within WADA 2025 permitted doses, IBA can provide small but relevant gains in anaerobic performance in healthy individuals, while simultaneously offering therapeutic bronchodilation for athletes with asthma or exercise‐induced bronchoconstriction. Dose restrictions are critical to minimize the risk of performance enhancement that exceeds therapeutic intent and to mitigate adverse effects. Further research is pivotal to ensure that anti‐doping policies align with health standards and ethical considerations for all athletes.

Objective: This study aims to determine the potential and limitations of artificial intelligence (AI) in this field by comparing the results of ChatGPT-4.5 and experts in the evaluation of YouTube videos intended for older adults. Materials and Methods: A search was conducted on YouTube using the keyword “fall prevention exercises for elderly,” and the 100 most viewed videos were examined. Of these, 64 videos that met the criteria were included in the study. The comprehensiveness, quality [global quality scale (GQS)], and reliability [Quality Criteria for Consumer Health Information (DISCERN)] of the videos were evaluated by two independent physiotherapists and ChatGPT-4.5. Agreement between the evaluations was tested using Wilcoxon signed-rank test, intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC), and Bland-Altman analyses. Results: No significant differences were found between ChatGPT-4.5 and human experts in terms of comprehensiveness (p=0.242) and GQS (p=0.083) scores, and a high level of agreement was observed (ICC 0.932 and 0.876, respectively). However, in DISCERN scores, ChatGPT-4.5 awarded significantly higher scores than the human experts (p=0.005), and the level of agreement was determined to be excellent (ICC=0.942). Nevertheless, a wide range of differences (limits of agreement: -4.9 to 7.18) was identified. Conclusion: ChatGPT-4.5 can be used as a reliable assessment tool in determining the comprehensiveness and quality levels of fall prevention exercise videos. However, it was concluded that in reliability scoring, AI should be used under expert supervision.

Tekanan darah sistolik dan diastolik di atas 140/90mmHg mengindikasikan hipertensi. Tinjauan penelitian ini mengkaji dampak merokok terhadap hipertensi pada orang dewasa. Pendekatan penelusuran pustaka menggunakan Publish or Perish dan Google Scholar (2022-2024) dengan istilah “kebiasaan merokok”, “hipertensi” dan “usia produktif”. Empat jurnal memenuhi persyaratan. Pada tahun 2022, 2023, dan 2024, hasil analisis pustaka cross-sectional dipublikasikan. Random, Puposive, dan Total Sampling digunakan. Alat penelitian adalah kuesioner. Analisis data menggunakan Chi-square (100%). Dalam pemeriksaan empat publikasi, tiga menemukan efek substansial merokok terhadap hipertensi dan satu tidak menemukan efek yang bermakna. Dengan demikian, kebiasaan merokok memengaruhi hipertensi usia produktif. Kepada petugas kesehatan: mendidik masyarakat untuk mengurangi atau berhenti merokok untuk meningkatkan kualitas hidup dan mencegah bahaya

Urothelial carcinoma accounts for the vast majority of diagnosed bladder cancer cases. Urothelial carcinoma is prone to recurrence and metastasis despite complete resection of the lesions. The present case report describes a patient who underwent cystoprostatectomy due to a diagnosis of recurrent bladder cancer, with a penile lesion found several years after surgery. A partial penectomy was performed and the subsequent histopathology result showed urothelial carcinoma of the urethra and the epithelium of the glans and foreskin nested by micturition. The present case is an extremely rare incidence of the spread of cancer through the urine. To date, only a few such cases have been reported in the literature.

Endometrial hyperplasia (EH) comprises a spectrum of abnormal proliferative changes in the endometrium, ranging from benign glandular overgrowth to lesions with substantial malignant potential. The importance of risk stratification and early identification is highlighted by the growing recognition of EH as a precursor to endometrial cancer. The main causes of EH, according to epidemiological research, include obesity, polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS), metabolic dysfunction, and extended exposure to unopposed estrogen. Emerging molecular markers, histological analysis, and imaging are all necessary for a proper diagnosis of EH because it might appear with vague clinical symptoms such as irregular uterine bleeding. Surgical intervention or progestin therapy are two possible management techniques for EH, depending on the lesion’s intricacy and the patient’s medical history, including fertility issues. Personalized therapy techniques and recent developments in molecular profiling have the potential to enhance patient outcomes by matching treatment to tumor biology and individual risk profiles. This review highlights the translational potential of molecular insights while synthesizing the most recent data on the epidemiology, risk factors, diagnostic techniques, and therapy of EH. A deeper comprehension of these elements is necessary to maximize treatment results and stop the development of endometrial cancer.

BACKGROUND Lumbar interbody fusion (LIF) is the primary treatment for lumbar degenerative diseases. Elderly patients are prone to anxiety and depression after undergoing surgery, which affects their postoperative recovery speed and quality of life. Effective prevention of anxiety and depression in elderly patients has become an urgent problem. AIM To investigate the trajectory of anxiety and depression levels in elderly patients after LIF, and the influencing factors. METHODS Random sampling was used to select 239 elderly patients who underwent LIF from January 2020 to December 2024 in Shenzhen Pingle Orthopedic Hospital. General information and surgery-related indices were recorded, and participants completed measures of psychological status, lumbar spine dysfunction, and quality of life. A latent class growth model was used to analyze the post-LIF trajectory of anxiety and depression levels, and unordered multi-categorical logistic regression was used to analyze the influencing factors. RESULTS Three trajectories of change in anxiety level were identified: Increasing anxiety (n = 26, 10.88%), decreasing anxiety (n = 27, 11.30%), and stable anxiety (n = 186, 77.82%). Likewise, three trajectories of change in depression level were identified: Increasing depression (n = 30, 12.55%), decreasing depression (n = 26, 10.88%), and stable depression (n = 183, 76.57%). Regression analysis showed that having no partner, female sex, elevated Oswestry dysfunction index (ODI) scores, and reduced 36-Item Short Form Health Survey scores all contributed to increased anxiety levels, whereas female sex, postoperative opioid use, and elevated ODI scores all contributed to increased depression levels. CONCLUSION During clinical observation, combining factors to predict anxiety and depression in post-LIF elderly patients enables timely intervention, quickens recovery, and enhances quality of life.

Abstract Introduction: Obesity is a major global health issue, associated with physical, psychological, and behavioral impacts. Sedentary lifestyles and depressive symptoms, common in individuals with obesity, may contribute to cognitive decline. Objective: To analyze the association between physical activity levels, the presence of depressive symptoms, and cognitive function performance in individuals with obesity. Materials and Methods: Cross-sectional study conducted with preoperative bariatric surgery patients at the “removed for anonymized review” in “removed for anonymized review”. Assessments included the International Physical Activity Questionnaire, Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale, Mini–Mental State Examination, and a general clinical form. Data were collected via Research Electronic Data Capture and analyzed with R software (version 4.5). Results: The sample included 100 individuals (mean body mass index: 41.2 ± 5.2); 58% were physically active, 42% sedentary, and 26% had clinically significant depressive symptoms. Multiple linear regression indicated a mean cognitive function score of 28.52 in the reference group ( P &lt; 0.001), with no significant association with sedentary behavior (β = +0.24; P = 0.469) or absence of depressive symptoms (β = −0.36; P = 0.398). Higher education was associated with better cognitive performance, particularly among those with completed higher education (β = +1.67; P &lt; 0.001) and incomplete higher education (β = +1.25; P = 0.019). The model was statistically significant (F: P =0.004). Conclusion: Educational level was shown to be the main determinant of cognitive function in individuals with obesity, whereas depressive symptoms and sedentary behavior showed no significant association.

Sürdürülebilir beslenme, biyoçeşitliliği koruyarak çevreye duyarlı, ekonomik ve kültürel olarak kabul edilebilir diyetlerle insan sağlığını desteklemeyi hedefler. Bu bağlamda, vejetaryen ve vegan diyetler çevresel etkileri azaltan sürdürülebilir yaklaşımlar olarak öne çıkar. Vejetaryenlik, hayvansal ürünlerin sınırlı tüketimini, veganlık ise tüm hayvansal gıdalardan kaçınmayı içerir. Bu diyetlerin sağlık üzerindeki etkileri dikkat çekicidir. Bitki bazlı diyetler, obezite, kardiyovasküler hastalıklar ve tip 2 diyabet riskini azaltırken, kansere karşı koruyucu etkiler gösterebilir. Ancak, özellikle vegan diyetlerde B12, demir, çinko ve kalsiyum eksiklikleri görülebilir ve bu durum takviye gerektirebilir. Vegan ve vejetaryen diyetlerin çevresel etkileri de olumlu yöndedir; sera gazı emisyonlarını, su tüketimini ve arazi kullanımını önemli ölçüde azaltır. Bitkisel protein kaynakları (soya, baklagiller, tahıllar) alternatif olarak kullanılmakta ve etin yerini tutan ürünlerin geliştirilmesinde önemli rol oynamaktadır. Sonuç olarak, iyi planlanmış vegan ve vejetaryen diyetler, bireysel sağlığı desteklerken, çevresel sürdürülebilirliği de teşvik eder. Ancak, bu diyetlerin potansiyel eksikliklerinin giderilmesi ve bilinçli bir şekilde uygulanması önemlidir. Beslenme uzmanları bu konuda rehberlik sağlamalıdır

This prospective observational trial supports the use of real-time, noninvasive, and radiation-free UHFUS for the intraoperative localization of GGOs in lung tissue. It has the potential to enhance the efficiency of lung surgery in detecting small tumors and identify new nodules.

Background and Objectives: The tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) classification system is the standard for staging gastric cancer and predicting survival. However, its accuracy can be compromised by insufficient lymph node (LN) dissection during surgery or inadequate pathologic examination. Alternative staging systems, such as the lymph node ratio (LNR) and log odds of positive lymph nodes (LODDS), may provide better prognostic value when LN examination is suboptimal. Because the current N staging system was not able to accurately stratify patients relative to their survival outcomes in our series, this study assessed the prognostic impact of LNR and LODDS on overall survival (OS) of patients who underwent radical gastrectomy for cancer. Materials and Methods: Between March 2005 and June 2025, the authors performed gastrectomy for gastric carcinoma in 114 patients. Out of these patients, 39 were excluded (19 had stage IV, while 20 underwent palliative gastrectomy with D1 lymphadenectomy). Thus, the study cohort included 75 patients who underwent curative gastrectomy, with 4 (5.3%) of them dying postoperatively. Potential prognostic factors associated with OS (including age, sex, tumor location, T stage, N stage, TNM stage, LNR, and LODDS) were evaluated by univariate and multivariate analysis. Because the recurrence data were missing in 41 patients, the disease-free survival (DFS) analysis would not be meaningful. Results: The OS analysis was based on the 71 patients surviving postoperatively. Because successive N stage groups could not accurately stratify patients according to their OS, we used X-tile software version 3.6.1 to identify two cut-offs (both for LNR and LODDS) that were able to stratify patients in three subgroups with significantly distinct survival outcomes. Multivariate analysis found that both LODDS and LNR systems were independent prognostic factors for OS. Conclusions: LNR and LODDS provide more detailed insights into lymph node status and have demonstrated potential for enhancing prognostic accuracy compared to N staging, even in patients who underwent curative gastrectomy with D2 lymphadenectomy. Although LNR and LODDS are usually useful in patients who underwent suboptimal lymphadenectomy, the current study demonstrated that these systems could improve prognostic stratification even in patients with more than 15 retrieved LNs. However, due to the small sample size, the current observations and proposed cut-offs of LNR and LODDS have to be validated in larger studies including such patients.

ABSTRACT Background Masculinity has been identified as a potential influence on psychological and physical health outcomes among male cancer survivors. This systematic review synthesized quantitative research examining associations between masculinity‐related constructs and survivorship outcomes, including mental health, physical functioning, and health‐related quality of life (HRQoL). Methods A systematic search of PsycINFO, CINAHL, and PubMed was conducted through March 2025, following PRISMA guidelines. Studies were included if they quantitatively assessed masculinity‐related variables in male cancer survivors and reported associations with HRQoL, mental health, or physical health outcomes. Study quality was assessed and a narrative synthesis was conducted. Results Thirty‐one studies met inclusion criteria. Traditional masculine norms (e.g., self‐reliance, dominance, stoicism) and cancer‐related masculine threat were consistently associated with poorer mental health, lower HRQoL, and greater symptom burden. In contrast, masculine self‐esteem, a positive appraisal of one's masculinity post‐cancer, was linked to better psychosocial outcomes and HRQoL across samples. Most studies were cross‐sectional and focused on prostate cancer survivors, often lacking demographic diversity. Conclusions Masculinity‐related constructs are meaningfully associated with cancer survivorship outcomes. Future work should prioritize longitudinal designs, cultural diversity, and clinical translation to develop gender‐sensitive interventions targeting masculine identity disruption and promoting adaptive self‐concepts.

Nutritional problems in toddlers remain a public health challenge, especially in areas with a high prevalence of stunting and malnutrition, such as Pangkep Regency. One of the interventions implemented by the government is the provision of supplementary feeding (PMT) made from local foods to improve the nutritional status of toddlers. This study aims to determine the effect of providing PMT made from local foods on the nutritional status of toddlers in the working area of ​​the Minasatene Community Health Center, Pangkep Regency. This study used a quantitative design with a pre-experimental one-group pretest–posttest approach. The study was conducted in August 2025 with a sample of 49 toddlers who received PMT, using a total sampling technique. Data were collected by measuring body weight before and after the PMT intervention for 60 days, then analyzed using a paired t-test. The results showed an increase in toddler body weight after PMT administration, with a change in nutritional status from undernutrition and severe malnutrition to mostly normal nutrition. Statistical tests showed a significant difference between body weight before and after the intervention (p&lt;0.05). It can be concluded that the provision of PMT made from local foods has a significant effect on improving the nutritional status of toddlers in the working area of ​​the Minasatene Community Health Center, Pangkep Regency.

Bu çalışmada pilates yapan bireylerin sosyal medya platformlarını kullanırken sergiledikleri bilinçli davranışların narsisizm özellikleri ile arasındaki ilişkinin ortaya konulması amaçlanmaktadır. Araştırmanın evrenini pilates yapan bireyler, çalışmanın örneklem grubunu amaçlı örneklem yöntemi ile seçilen İstanbul’da özel bir pilates salonunda pilates yapan bireyler oluşturmaktadır. Araştırmada kişisel bilgi formuna ek olarak Görünümle İlişkili Sosyal Medya Bilinç Düzeyi Ölçeği ile Sosyal Medyada Narsisizm Ölçeği kullanılmıştır. Çalışmanın verileri değerlendirilme sürecinde sosyo demografik özellikleri belirlemek için yüzde ve frekans değerleri kullanılmıştır. Verilerin dağılım özellikleri çarpıklık ve basıklık değerleri incelenmiş, normal dağılıma uygun olduğuna karar verilmiştir. Bu bağlamda ikili değişkenler için bağımsız örneklem t-testi, ikiden fazla değişkenler için ise one-way ANOVA testleri kullanılmıştır. Ölçek alt boyutları arasındaki ilişkiyi tespit etmek için ise Pearson korelasyon analizi kullanılmıştır. Araştırmada medeni durum, sosyal medya kullanım sıklığı, paylaşım sıklığı, gelir düzeyine göre sosyal medya bilinç düzeyleri arasında anlamlı farklılık bulunmuştur. Narsisizm eğilimleri ile sosyal medya kullanım sıklığı, paylaşım sıklığı, gelir düzeyine göre anlamlı farklılık tespit edilmiştir. Yaş ile narsistik hayranlık alt boyutu arasında pozitif yönde, yaş ile GİSMBÖ arasında negatif yönde, GİSMBÖ ile narsistik hayranlık ve narsistik rekabet arasında pozitif yönde ilişki ortaya çıkmıştır. Sonuç olarak katılımcıların sosyal medya bilinç düzeyleri ile narsisizm arasında ilişki vardır. Özellikle genç bireyler için sosyal medya bilinç düzeylerini artırmaya yönelik ve narsisizm üzerinde etkilerinin değerlendirilmesi önerilmektedir.

An automated post-processing pipeline was developed specifically for 4D flow MRI in patients with AAA. The pipeline is robust for varying anatomies and may facilitate 4D flow MRI implementation in the clinical workflow.

Porcine Reproductive and Respiratory Syndrome Virus (PRRSV) is endemic in many pig-producing countries and poses significant health and economic challenges. Enhanced surveillance strategies are essential for effective disease management. This study aimed to evaluate and compare the performance of different time-series modeling techniques to predict weekly PRRSV-positive laboratory submissions in Ontario, Canada. Ten years of PRRSV diagnostic data were obtained from the Animal Health Laboratory at the University of Guelph and were processed into a weekly time series. The dataset was analyzed with autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA), exponential smoothing (ETS), random forest (RF), and recurrent neural network (RNN) models. Two validation strategies were employed: a traditional train-test split and a simulated prospective rolling forecast. Model accuracy was evaluated using common predictive error metrics. Descriptive analysis indicated a gradual increase in PRRSV positive submissions over time, with no consistent seasonal pattern. ARIMA and ETS models generally overpredict case counts, while RF and RNN tended to underpredict them. Among the evaluated models, the RF regression model most accurately captured the underlying time-series dynamics and produced the lowest prediction errors across both validation approaches. Despite outperforming other models, the RF model’s high relative prediction errors limit its suitability for accurate forecasting of PRRSV-positive submissions in Ontario’s routine surveillance system. Further data refinement and algorithm improvements are warranted.

Saygıdeğer Meslektaşlarım ve Kıymetli Okurlar, Ebelik; insanlık tarihi kadar köklü, yaşamın mucizesine tanıklık eden, bilim ve sanatın şefkatle harmanlandığı eşsiz bir disiplindir. Tarihsel süreçte "doğuma yardım eden kadın" rolünden evrilerek, bugün kanıta dayalı uygulamalarla donanmış, kadın ve toplum sağlığının merkezinde yer alan profesyonel bir kimliğe bürünmüştür. Elinizdeki bu eser, "Ebelikte Çok Boyutlu Yaklaşımlar: Klinikten Topluma", mesleğimizin bu evrimini ve genişleyen etki alanını derinlemesine irdelemek amacıyla hazırlanmıştır. Günümüzde ebelik hizmetlerini tek bir boyuta indirgemek imkansızdır. Bir ebenin eli, doğumhanede en kritik klinik müdahaleyi gerçekleştirirken; zihni ve yüreği, o kadının psikolojik iyilik halini, ailenin sosyal yapısını ve toplumun kültürel dinamiklerini analiz etmektedir. Bu kitap, tam da bu "çok boyutluluğu" ele almaktadır. Eser, hastane koridorlarındaki ileri klinik becerilerden, sahadaki ev ziyaretlerine; yüksek riskli gebeliklerin yönetiminden, emzirme danışmanlığına; afet durumlarında ebelik hizmetlerinden, cinsel sağlık ve üreme sağlığı politikalarına kadar geniş bir spektrumu kapsamaktadır. "Klinikten Topluma" mottosuyla yola çıkarken amacımız; ebenin sadece hastayla birebir temas kurduğu anlarda değil, toplumun sağlık okuryazarlığını artırmada ve koruyucu sağlık hizmetlerini yaygınlaştırmada üstlendiği liderlik rolünü de vurgulamaktır. Çünkü biliyoruz ki; sağlıklı bir toplum, sağlıklı bir kadınla; sağlıklı bir kadın ise nitelikli bir ebelik bakımıyla mümkündür. Bu eserin ortaya çıkmasında emeği geçen, bilgi birikimlerini ve sahadaki tecrübelerini cömertçe paylaşan tüm bölüm yazarlarına şükranlarımı sunuyorum. Akademik titizlikle hazırlanan bu çalışmanın; ebelik lisans ve lisansüstü öğrencilerine, klinikte çalışan meslektaşlarımıza ve kadın sağlığı alanında çalışan tüm sağlık profesyonellerine bir başucu kaynağı olmasını temenni ediyorum. Bilimin ışığında, mesleki etik değerlerimizden ödün vermeden ve her zaman "önce insan" diyerek sürdürdüğümüz bu yolculukta, bu kitabın mesleğimize yeni bir vizyon katması dileğiyle... Sevgi ve saygılarımla, Doç. Dr. Reyhan AYDIN DOĞAN, Dr. Öğr. Üyesi Sebahat HÜSEYİNOĞLU

ABSTRACT Background Neurocutaneous melanosis (NCM) is a rare congenital syndrome characterized by congenital melanocytic nevus of the skin with melanocytic deposits in the central nervous system. Patients with neurological symptoms have a poor prognosis and may die within years of symptom onset. Case Report A fetus was found to have diffuse enhancement of cerebellar hemispheric echo at 23 weeks of gestation and amniocentesis was performed at 25 weeks of gestation. Fetal DNA was extracted from amniotic fluid for copy number variation sequencing (CNV‐seq) and Trio‐total whole‐exome sequencing (Trio‐WES). However, genetic tests did not reveal pathogenic mutations associated with this case phenotype. At 29 weeks of pregnancy, a fetoscopy examination was performed, and multiple scattered pigmentation spots were found on the skin of the fetus's back. At 31 weeks of pregnancy, the pregnant woman requested an induced abortion to terminate the pregnancy. Multiple areas of pigmentation can be seen on the skin of a stillborn fetus. Pathological examination confirmed a large amount of melanin deposition in the cerebellum tissue of the stillborn fetus. Conclusions We reported a rare case of prenatal NCM, but no known pathogenic mutations, such as NRAS gene mutations, were found. This confirmed that there might be no definite pathogenic mutations in the NCM case, providing important data support for the prenatal identification and diagnosis of NCM. We reported a rare case of prenatal NCM, but no known pathogenic mutations, such as NARS gene mutations, were found. This confirmed that there might be no definite pathogenic mutations in the NCM case, providing important data support for the prenatal identification and diagnosis of NCM.

El estudio MATTERHORN es el único ensayo controlado aleatorizado hasta la fecha que compara la cirugía de la válvula mitral con la reparación transcatéter de borde a borde para la insuficiencia mitral funcional en pacientes sintomáticos no aptos para cirugía de revascularización coronaria. Este estudio presenta limitaciones significativas. La exclusión de la cirugía de revascularización coronaria es una omisión crítica, ya que es la intervención principal para mejorar la supervivencia en estos pacientes, mientras que la cirugía aislada de la válvula mitral aborda principalmente los síntomas y la calidad de vida. Además, numerosas deficiencias metodológicas y defectos inherentes comprometen la validez interna del ensayo y su aplicabilidad más amplia en la práctica clínica. Por lo tanto, es esencial realizar una reevaluación exhaustiva que destaque estos sesgos, deficiencias metodológicas y limitaciones, sobre todo ante la posible aparición de guías clínicas nuevas.

Background. Regional anesthesia is increasingly used due to its advantages over general anesthesia; however, its potential complications require careful evaluation. Aim. This review aimed to synthesize current evidence on the incidence, risk factors, and prevention of neurological injury, hematoma, and infection associated with regional anesthesia. Material and methods. Relevant peer-reviewed literature—including systematic reviews, retrospective cohorts, and randomized trials—was analyzed to provide a comprehensive overview. Results. Neurological complications, though uncommon, may persist in a subset of patients and are linked to factors such as high-pressure intrafascicular injection and inadequate needle guidance. Hematomas remain rare but are more likely in patients on anticoagulants and can result in permanent deficits if diagnosis and decompression are delayed. Infections, particularly with prolonged catheter use, present a serious risk, with higher rates in peripheral nerve blocks and pediatric populations. Conclusions. Preventive strategies include ultrasound guidance, triple safety protocols, careful antithrombotic management, and strict aseptic techniques. Recent evidence supports the efficacy of real-time pressure monitoring and prophylactic antibiotic use in reducing adverse outcomes. This review underscores the importance of patient-specific risk assessment and adherence to evolving safety protocols in minimizing complications from regional anesthesia.

Anemia is a condition characterized by a decrease in hemoglobin levels. One common complication during the postpartum periode is postpartum hemorrhage, which can be caused by anemia of mothers, as it can slow down wound healing, increase the risk of infection, recude brrast milk production, and cause extreme fatigue that interferes with mothers’ ability to care for newborns. Young coconut water consumption on increasing hemoglobin levels in postpartum mothers. The design used was a quasi-experiment with a pre-post test and a control group design involving a sample 0f 32 postpartum mothers divided into 16 intervention and 16 control groups. The result indicated that 10 mothers experienced an increase in hemoglobin levels after being given youngcoconut water, while six mothers experienced a decrease in hemoglobin levels. The p-value obtained was 0.045 &lt; 0.05. Conclusion: young coconut water consumption increased hemoglobin levels in postpartum mothers at Limboto Health Center.

Aim: This randomized controlled study aimed to examine the effects of mandala coloring on perceived stress and anxiety levels in patients with type 2 diabetes. Method: This study was conducted between December 2023 and December 2024 with 92 inpatients in the endocrinology clinic of a university hospital. Patients were randomly assigned to the intervention group (n = 46) or control group (n = 46). The intervention group colored one mandala daily for 7 consecutive days, while the control group received routine care. Data were collected using the Personal Information Form, Perceived Stress Scale (PSS), and State Anxiety Scale (SAS). Statistical analyses were performed using two-way mixed ANOVA to examine group, time, and interaction effects, with Bonferroni correction applied for two primary outcomes. The study was reported in accordance with the CONSORT 2010 guidelines. Results: Compared with the control group, the intervention group showed significant reductions in the PSS total score (η 2 = 0.122, p = 0.000), Inadequate Self-Efficacy subscale (η 2 = 0.156, p &lt; 0.001), Stress Perception subscale (η 2 = 0.067, p = 0.013), and SAS score (η 2 = 0.284, p = 0.000) after the intervention. No adverse events related to mandala coloring were reported. Conclusion: Mandala coloring effectively reduced perceived stress and state anxiety in patients with type 2 diabetes. It may be considered a feasible nursing intervention for the psychological management of these patients.

Introduction: Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is a hereditary periodic fever characterized by its autosomal recessive nature. The complexity of its presentation and response to treatment poses significant challenges in diagnosing and managing FMF patients. This article aims to shed light on the primary disagreements concerning FMF diagnosis and management, presenting them in a more accessible format through a simplified flowchart based on existing FMF recommendations. Methods: To conduct this review, we scoured several electronic databases, including PubMed, Google Scholar, and connected papers focusing on FMF recommendations, guidelines, challenges, and conflicting viewpoints. Our search terms included ‘familial Mediterranean fever’ and ‘recommendation’; ‘familial Mediterranean fever’ and ‘guideline’; ‘familial Mediterranean fever’ and ‘update’; ‘familial Mediterranean fever’ and ‘controversies’; ‘familial Mediterranean fever’ and ‘difficulty’. Additionally, we checked the reference lists of relevant journals for further information. Results: To facilitate understanding, we utilized four algorithmic graphics to summarize the recommendations. Conclusion: The diagnosis of FMF patients demands a high level of suspicion, particularly in unusual presentations. By highlighting conflicting points and offering a simplified algorithmic flow chart, physicians can better assess the likelihood of FMF, initiate appropriate treatment, and adjust medication dosages as necessary.

Stunting pada anak merupakan masalah gizi kronis yang tidak hanya dipengaruhi oleh asupan nutrisi, tetapi juga oleh pola pengasuhan dalam keluarga, termasuk keterlibatan ayah. Peran ayah dalam pemenuhan gizi, pengasuhan, dan pemantauan kesehatan anak berpotensi memengaruhi status gizi anak usia dini. Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk menganalisis hubungan antara peran ayah dan kejadian stunting pada anak usia 12–36 bulan di wilayah kerja Puskesmas Kecamatan Lima Puluh, Kota Pekanbaru. Penelitian ini menggunakan desain deskriptif korelasional dengan pendekatan cross-sectional. Sampel penelitian berjumlah 108 anak usia 12–36 bulan yang dipilih menggunakan teknik cluster random sampling. Peran ayah diukur menggunakan kuesioner keterlibatan ayah, sedangkan status gizi anak dinilai berdasarkan indikator tinggi badan menurut usia (TB/U) sesuai standar WHO. Analisis data dilakukan menggunakan uji Chi-square. Hasil penelitian menunjukkan bahwa sebagian besar anak memiliki status gizi normal (78,7%) dan mayoritas ayah memiliki peran yang baik dalam pengasuhan (91,7%). Terdapat hubungan yang signifikan antara peran ayah dan kejadian stunting pada anak usia 12–36 bulan (p = 0,003), di mana keterlibatan ayah yang baik berkaitan dengan risiko stunting yang lebih rendah. Temuan ini menegaskan pentingnya pelibatan ayah dalam upaya pencegahan stunting melalui pendekatan berbasis keluarga, khususnya pada periode 1.000 Hari Pertama Kehidupan. Stunting in children is a chronic nutritional problem influenced not only by inadequate nutrient intake but also by family caregiving practices, including paternal involvement. Fathers’ roles in nutritional provision, caregiving, and health monitoring may affect the nutritional status of young children. This study aimed to analyze the relationship between paternal roles and the incidence of stunting among children aged 12–36 months in the working area of Lima Puluh Subdistrict Primary Health Center, Pekanbaru City. This study employed a descriptive correlational design with a cross-sectional approach. The sample consisted of 108 children aged 12–36 months selected using a cluster random sampling technique. Paternal roles were measured using a father involvement questionnaire, while children’s nutritional status was assessed based on height-for-age (H/A) indicators according to WHO standards. Data were analyzed using the Chi-square test. The results showed that most children had normal nutritional status (78.7%) and the majority of fathers demonstrated good involvement in caregiving (91.7%). A significant relationship was found between paternal roles and the incidence of stunting among children aged 12–36 months (p = 0.003), where good paternal involvement was associated with a lower risk of stunting. These findings highlight the importance of engaging fathers in family-based stunting prevention efforts, particularly during the first 1,000 days of life.

Background: The spleen is the largest lymphoid tissue with a unique structure that provides an environment for direct contact between blood and immune system. It is vulnerable for enlargement (splenomegaly) beyond normal limits. Splenomegaly is an important sign in pediatrics. Many pathological processes may affect the spleen in children. In most cases it is the result of a systemic disease. Identification of etiology is mandatory for proper management of splenomegaly in children. Objective: To determine clinical profile, and spectrum of etiologies of splenomegaly among children attending to Al-Kuwait University Hospital in Sana’aYemen. Methods and Settings: It was a retrospective descriptive study collected data of children with splenomegaly over a period of two years (from January 2020 to December 2021). A questionnaire was used to capture data which included demographic data of child (age, gender, resident area, father’s job, family income), data related to characteristics of splenomegaly (degree of splenomegaly, associated hepatomegaly, associated lymphadenopathy, associated anemia, and associated hypersplenism), data related to clinical manifestations, and data related to etiology of splenomegaly. Results: The study has included 200 children presented with splenomegaly. Number of males was slightly higher than females (53.5% vs 46.5%). The age ranged between 1 years and 15 years with most of the cases (43.5%) in the age group between 6 and 10 years. Most of cases (60%) were coming from rural areas, and most of them (74%) presented with moderately enlarged spleen. An associated hepatomegaly, lymphadenopathy, anemia, hypersplenism were observed in rate of 58.5%, 23%, 79%, and 16% respectively. Results of this study revealed that the most frequent clinical manifestations were fever, pallor, weakness, and abdominal distention in rates of 86.5%, 78%, 60%, and 48% respectively. Followed by jaundice, weight loss, and abdominal pain in rates of 33.5%, 27.5%, and 24% respectively. Other less common symptoms were dyspnea, edema, and bleeding in rates of 22.5%, 18%, and 13.5% respectively. Regarding etiological diagnosis, the most frequent etiologies observed in this study were hematological (27% caused by hemolytic anemias, 9% caused by lymphomas, and 2% caused by leukemias), infective (malaria represented 19%, visceral leishmania represented 6%, enteric fever represented 5%, and septicemia represented 4%), storage disease (glycogen storage disease in 3.5%, and mucopolysaccharidosis in 2.5%), congestive blood flow (portal hypertension in 2.5%, and congestive heart failure in 1.5%), and connective tissue disease represented 3.5%. Unknown diagnosis was documented for 10% of cases. No significant association was found between etiology and gender or age. Conclusions Splenomegaly is an important sign in pediatrics. The underlying etiologies observed in this study were hematologic (38%), infectious (34%), storage disease (6%), congestive (4%), connective tissue disease (3.5%), miscellaneous (4.5%), and unknown etiology (10%). Most cases seen in the age group under 10 years, and most of cases presented with moderate degree of splenomegaly. A greater degree of suspicion in these cases and proper laboratory workup and early referral to specialized centers is mandatory and can improve the outcome significantly.

Background: Alveolar ridge preservation following tooth extraction remains a clinical challenge, necessitating guided bone regeneration (GBR). The aim of this study was to compare the biocompatibility and tissue response of an experimental resorbable collagen (rCOL) membrane reinforced by poly-lactic-co-glycolic acid to a commercially available non-resorbable titanium (Ti)-reinforced polytetrafluorethylene (rPTFE) membrane in a large translational (beagle) mandibular model. Materials and Methods: Beagles (N = 7) underwent bilateral extraction of mandibular premolars, with full-thickness flaps raised to expose the mandibular bone. Bilateral fourwalled semi-saddle defects (2 defects per animal) were created using a low-speed cylindrical burr under copious irrigation. Defects were filled with porcine xenograft (Xe) putty and covered with either an experimental rCOL, or commercially-available rPTFE (Cytoplast® Ti-150, Osteogenics Biomedical, Inc., Lubbock, TX, USA) membrane. Animals were allowed to heal for 6 weeks and defects were evaluated by microcomputed tomography (μCT) and histological analysis. Results: μCT demonstrated gradual bone ingrowth and bone graft bridging within the defects in both membrane groups. However, bone formation within the defects was significantly greater in defects treated with rCOL (27.15 ± 6.22 %) relative to rPTFE (17.84 ± 6.22 %) (p = 0.041). Histological evaluation demonstrated that the rPTFE group presented with inflammatory infiltrate and granulation tissue between the defect and membrane surface. In contrast, the defects covered by the rCOL membrane evidenced direct contact with newly formed osseous and connective tissue layers. Conclusions: rCOL membranes demonstrated superior healing outcomes characterized by minimal inflammation and higher levels of bone ingrowth within the defect site, compared to rPTFE counterparts.

Decompression alone demonstrates non-inferiority in terms of efficacy for treating low back pain due to DS compared to fusion, with additional benefits in operation time and blood loss. The addition of dynamic stabilization to decompression does not yield significant benefits. Further research with larger cohorts and extended follow-up is necessary for definitive conclusions.

Latar belakang: Operasi usus buntu adalah prosedur pembedahan untuk mengobati radang usus buntu, tetapi nyeri pasca operasi adalah komplikasi yang umum terjadi. Jika tidak ditangani dengan baik, rasa nyeri dapat memengaruhi tidur, menunda penyembuhan, meningkatkan aktivitas simpatis, dan menyebabkan tekanan emosional. Metode non-farmakologis seperti relaksasi napas dalam merupakan pilihan yang aman dan efektif untuk mengatasi nyeri ini. Teknik relaksasi napas dalam telah terbukti secara efektif mengurangi intensitas nyeri dengan merelaksasi kejang otot, yang disebabkan oleh peningkatan prostaglandin, yang menyebabkan vasodilatasi dan peningkatan aliran darah ke area yang mengalami kejang dan iskemia. Selain itu, teknik ini dapat merangsang pelepasan opioid endogen, seperti enkephalin dan endorfin. Enkephalin berfungsi sebagai neurotransmitter yang mengatur rasa sakit, emosi dan stres, sedangkan endorfin memberikan rasa rileks, nyaman dan tenang pada tubuh. Menurut WHO (World Health Organization) pada tahun 2022, jumlah kematian akibat apendisitis mencapai 21.000 klien dengan jumlah penderita laki-laki lebih banyak dibandingkan perempuan. Tujuan: Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mengetahui efektivitas teknik relaksasi nafas dalam terhadap penurunan nyeri akut pada pasien pasca apendektomi. Metode: Penelitian ini merupakan studi kasus kualitatif yang melibatkan dua pasien pasca operasi. Data dikumpulkan melalui observasi, wawancara, dan penilaian skala nyeri dengan menggunakan Numeric Rating Scale (NRS), sebelum dan sesudah menerapkan teknik pernapasan dalam selama 3 hari (dua kali sehari selama 10-15 menit). Hasil: Kedua pasien menunjukkan penurunan tingkat nyeri, dengan indikator yang lebih baik seperti berkurangnya meringis, kegelisahan, dan tanda-tanda vital yang normal. Kesimpulan: Teknik relaksasi pernapasan dalam efektif dalam menurunkan tingkat nyeri akut pada pasien operasi usus buntu dan dapat digunakan sebagai asuhan keperawatan suportif di samping pengobatan farmakologis.

Downregulation of miR-3651 expression inhibits osteoclast formation, and knockdown of KRAS restores this inhibitory effect.

&lt;p&gt;Overview of AEs (safety population).&lt;/p&gt;

Bu çalışma, Tanburi Cemil Bey’in Kürdîlihicazkâr makamındaki Peşrevinin, Necdet Yaşar’ın tanbur icrası üzerinden analiz edilmesini konu almaktadır. Araştırmada, Arel-Ezgi-Uzdilek ses sistemine dayalı teorik model ile pratik icra arasında var olan farklılıklar ortaya konmuş ve bu farklılıkların sebepleri tartışılmıştır. Kürdîlihicazkâr makamının karar çeşnisinde kullanılan La bemol (Nim Zirgüle) perdesi, teorik olarak 5 koma olarak tanımlanırken, Necdet Yaşar’ın icrasında bu perdenin farklı tizliklerde kullanıldığı tespit edilmiştir. Melodyne ve MakamBox gibi dijital analiz araçları kullanılarak, Necdet Yaşar’ın icrasında La bemol (Nim Zirgüle) perdesinin cent ve koma cinsinden farklılıkları incelenmiş, icradaki perde kullanımının teorik sistemden sapmalar içerdiği belirlenmiştir. Araştırma, Türk Müziğinde bireysel yorumun, icra edilen perdelerin mikrotonal özellikleri üzerinde büyük bir etkisi olduğunu ortaya koymuştur. Ayrıca, tanbur gibi mikrotonal detayların öne çıktığı enstrümanların teknik özellikleri ve icracının fiziksel kontrolü, teorik sistemden sapmalara neden olabilmektedir. Çalışma, Kürdîlihicazkâr makamı gibi bileşik makamların analizinde teorik modellerin dijital araçlarla desteklenmesinin önemine dikkat çekmektedir. Bu bağlamda, bireysel icraların ve dijital analizlerin, Türk Müziği teorisi ve pratiği arasındaki ilişkiyi anlamada önemli katkılar sunduğu sonucuna ulaşılmıştır.

Bu yazı Türk Dil Kurumu tarafından Ankara’da 16- 17 Aralık 2025 tarihleri arasında gerçekleştirilen IV. Uluslararası Ad Bilimi Bilgi Şöleni etkinliğini bilim dünyasına tanıtmayı amaçlamaktadır.

Celem artykułu jest analiza, jak młode pokolenie Albańczyków mieszkających w Strudze (Macedonia Północna) przyswaja język macedoński i mówi w tym języku w sytuacji stabilnej dwujęzyczności. Z wywiadów i ankiet wynika, że głównym źródłem przyswojenia jest dla nich lokalny dialekt macedoński. Od IV klasy szkoły podstawowej (10 lat) dzieci mają również zajęcia z języka macedońskiego prowadzone w standardowej macedońszczyźnie. Wskutek tego wraz z wiekiem u badanych zwiększa się zróżnicowanie między lokalnym dialektem a standardowym macedońskim. Ważną granicą w tym procesie jest wiek 15 i 16 lat. Najszybciej zanika konstrukcja DOM, dłużej utrzymują się inne cechy dialektalne, m.in. końcówka -t w formie Pres 3SG. Proces ten jest indywidualny i często zależy od tego, jak często dialektyzmy występują w mowie rodziców.

Настоящая работа посвящена исследованию роста кристаллов и люминесцентных характеристик литий-бариевых фторидов, боратов и фторидоборатов (LiBaF3, LiBa2B5O10, LiBa12(BO3)7F4), допированных редкоземельными элементами (РЗЭ = Sm, Eu, Tb). Кристаллы были успешно выращены методом раствор-расплавной кристаллизации в четверной взаимной системе Li, Ba, B // O, F. Проведены кристаллохимический анализ, исследование химического состава и детальное изучение спектров фотолюминесценции и возбуждения. Установлено эффективное включение РЗЭ в структуру матриц, при этом чистые матрицы демонстрируют собственное дефектное свечение в сине-голубой области. Показано, что LiBa2B5O10 и LiBaF3 являются эффективными матрицами для ионов Eu3+, обеспечивая интенсивную оранжево-красную люминесценцию. Кристаллы LiBa12(BO3)7F4 продемонстрировали наибольшую гибкость в настройке цвета: от яркого зеленого с Tb3+ до оранжево-красного с Sm3+, а также сложный концентрационно-зависимый перенос энергии между Tb3+ и Eu3+, позволяющий регулировать цветность в широком диапазоне.

Metastases to the pancreas (PM), although rare, have been increasingly identified in recent years, especially among high-volume pancreatic centers. They are often asymptomatic and incidentally detected during follow-up examinations, even several years after the treatment of the primary tumor. In this scenario, endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) has emerged as a crucial diagnostic tool for PM, being capable of providing a detailed morphological characterization and safe and effective tissue acquisition for cytohistological examination. The aim of our study was to extensively review the current evidence concerning the role of EUS in the diagnosis of PM, specifically focusing on its morphological features, contrast-enhancement patterns, and tissue acquisition techniques.

Pembangunan Bendungan Cibeet Paket 1 menghadapi tantangan geologi berupa dominasi batuan sedimen (batu pasir dan batu serpih) dengan tingkat kekerasan sedang yang memiliki banyak kekar dan rekahan. Kondisi ini berpotensi menimbulkan risiko kebocoran tinggi yang dapat mengancam stabilitas bendungan. Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mengetahui efektivitas metode Trial Grouting dalam menurunkan nilai permeabilitas dan memenuhi target kekedapan yang disyaratkan (Lu &lt; 3). Metode yang digunakan adalah uji coba injeksi semen (grouting) dengan sistem bertahap melalui tahapan pengeboran Pilot Hole, Secondary Hole, Tersier Hole, dan Check Hole menggunakan metode upstage. Analisis dilakukan secara kuantitatif berdasarkan perbandingan nilai Lugeon (Lu), volume injeksi, dan koefisien permeabilitas (k) sebelum dan sesudah grouting. Hasil penelitian menunjukkan penurunan signifikan terhadap nilai Lugeon dari rata-rata awal yang tinggi. Koefisien permeabilitas berhasil diturunkan dari orde 10-4 cm/det menjadi 10-6 cm/det, dengan tingkat efektivitas keberhasilan di atas 93% pada seluruh segmen kedalaman. Analisis biaya pelaksanaan Trial Grouting pada STA 0+157 mencatatkan total anggaran sebesar Rp. 133,965,476.04. Dapat disimpulkan bahwa metode grouting yang diterapkan terbukti efektif meningkatkan kualitas kekedapan tanah pondasi dan layak dijadikan acuan untuk pekerjaan perbaikan pondasi pada Bendungan Cibeet.

Background: Millionth clusters provide dynamic settings that profoundly affect pathogen activity and human reactions, making communicable and non-communicable disorders complicated biological processes. Pathogens recognize that elevated population density facilitates rapid mutations and dissemination. Objective: The purpose of the present study was to identify potential vulnerabilities and tailor healthcare services, to evaluate healthcare service distribution, to analyze emergency response effectiveness, to Identify Strengths and Challenges, province during mass gatherings in Babil, Iraq, 2023. Methodology: This cross-sectional design, from August 31, 2023, to September 6, 2023. Data was collected from a mobile clinic (medical stations) located in Babylon Province, Iraq by 15 trained data collectors across five sectors in the province, including (46 governmental and 4 non-governmental) mobile clinics. Using Kobo toolbox, which included questions/tables. The obtained data was statistically analyzed. Results: The study included 7991 visitors. The mean age of the visitant was 30.5 ± 9.84. Among age groups, the highest percentage was for the 26 to 35 age group, which represents 25.3% of the total visitors. The ratio of male to female was 1:1. Iran nation about 90%, of the study sample from the total visitant out of Iraq. The majority of data entered (we distributed the mawkibs on the province sectors) from the Al-Hilla First sector was (35%), while the Al-Musayyib sector was 28% the lowest data entered was the Kutha sector. Supportive elements about (10%) such as bandages, sugar test strips, massage elements, personal protective element. There 14% of visitors were referred to emergency hospitals in Babylon during mass gatherings, 100% of emergency cases healed. Establish 24-hour open mobile clinics to serve visitors, especially active surveillance/real-time surveillance like food poisoning. The number of active surveillance staff and clinics was 25% distributed throughout the province's healthcare sectors, and only (15%) of the mobile clinics had physicians. Conclusion: Babylon Province demonstrated a good health surveillance system during the Arbaenia pilgrimage and demonstrated a robust framework for managing large-scale public health events. While the system has proven effective in many areas, addressing identified challenges through strategic improvements can further enhance its efficiency and effectiveness. Journal of Current and Advance Medical Research, July 2024;11(2):109-114

Both IL-40 and sCD40L are significantly elevated in MS and exhibit promising diagnostic validity. These biomarkers may serve as complementary tools for monitoring MS disease activity and progression, offering potential value in clinical practice and therapeutic decision-making.

ABSTRACT Aims To examine factors influencing emergency nurse turnover and retention pre‐ and post‐COVID‐19 and inform planned Participatory Systems Mapping research. Design A scoping review of the literature reporting reasons emergency nurses leave, intend to leave or stay. Methods Following the Joanna Briggs Institute methodology and a pre‐registered protocol, databases and grey literature were systematically searched in January 2025 (updated August 2025). Literature published after 1st January 2010, was included. Two reviewers independently screened records, and 10% of extractions were cross‐checked. Data were grouped thematically on a visual coding system using the Miro platform. Pre‐ and post‐COVID‐19 sources were categorised and analysed using a two‐dimensional framework of intensity and frequency. Data Sources MedLine, CINAHL, PsycINFO, Web of Science, Cochrane and grey literature. Results Ninety‐three sources were included. Burnout, workload, staffing and workplace violence (WPV) were linked across study designs to turnover, while job satisfaction, supportive leadership and team cohesion appeared to support retention. Problem‐focused and resilience‐based coping were associated with retention across study designs ( n = 5); emotion‐focused strategies were linked with poorer outcomes ( n = 3). In a subset of 86 sources, traditional protective factors (leadership support and team camaraderie) appeared weakened post‐COVID‐19. A novel theme of moral obligation to remain, despite personal risk, emerged. Adaptive coping gave way to downshifting and emotional suppression. Conclusion The included evidence indicates that multiple, interacting factors shape emergency nurse turnover and retention, whilst systemic strategies aligning operational demands with psychological safety and core nursing values may contribute to sustainable retention. Implications for the Profession Workforce interventions should address the psychological legacy of COVID‐19 and focus on rebuilding trust, flexibility and moral sustainability in emergency departments. Impact While individual drivers of turnover are known, their complex interplay and retention factors are underexplored. This review identifies themes transcending boundaries and recurring across the turnover pathway, underscoring the need for multi‐level interventions relevant to both nurse managers and policy makers. Reporting Method Reporting follows the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta‐Analyses Extension for Scoping Reviews guidelines (PRISMA‐ScR). Patient or Public Contribution This study did not include patient or public involvement in its design, conduct or reporting.

Purpose: To evaluate the short-term efficacy and safety of intravitreal brolucizumab combined with sub-Tenon triamcinolone acetonide in treating diabetic macular edema (DME). Methods: Medical records were retrospectively reviewed for 11 patients with DME (14 eyes) treated with intravitreal brolucizumab and sub-Tenon triamcinolone acetonide injections at our hospital using a 1 + pro re nata injection regimen. Data collected included best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA), central macular thickness (CMT), injection frequency, and adverse events. Patients were followed up for at least 6 months. Results: At baseline, the mean BCVA was 0.43 logMAR, and the mean CMT was 418.4 µm. After 1 month of treatment, BCVA improved, and CMT significantly decreased in all cases. These improvements were maintained over 6 months of treatment, with a mean injection frequency of 1.14 injections over 6 months. This combination therapy was effective both in patients who were treatment naïve at baseline and in those who were previously treated with an anti–vascular endothelial growth factor agent. No significant complications, such as intraocular inflammation or elevated intraocular pressure, were observed during follow-up. Conclusions: Combination therapy with intravitreal brolucizumab and sub-Tenon triamcinolone acetonide may offer anatomic benefits in patients with DME, requiring fewer injections. Further evaluation using larger, prospectively designed studies is warranted to confirm its functional efficacy and long-term safety.

Background: Globally, inadequate sanitation behaviours have accounted for numerous health risks. World Health Organization (WHO) reports that poor sanitation contributes to spread of diseases such as diarrhoea, cholera, and typhoid, which are responsible for a significant burden of morbidity and mortality, particularly in low- and middle-income countries in the world. Methods: A cross-sectional descriptive study was carried at Benue State University, Makurdi, Nigeria, with a multistage sampling technique. Data was collected and analysed using SPSS (version 20.0). Results: We observed insufficient handwashing facilities at strategic locations on campus (86.6), with inadequate awareness and education on sanitation behaviours, accounting for the improper sanitation among the students. Also, inadequate sanitary facilities such as insufficient number of clean and well-maintained restrooms (52.7%), poor waste management system as a result of insufficient waste collection and disposal services on campus (46.0%) as a result of lack of strict enforcement of sanitation rules and policies (41.8%) all were major contributing factors. Conclusions: Accommodation and sanitation facilities in halls and hostels were found to be inadequate. Some reasons for the poor state of some of the facilities found in our study includes absent sanitation rules and policies on campus, lack of awareness campaigns or programs on campus to promote better sanitation behaviours, among others; were found to contribute significantly to the poor state of sanitation on campus.

In AF patients receiving OACs, higher CHA<sub>2</sub>DS<sub>2</sub>-VASc scores are associated with an increased prevalence and severity of VC, as well as a higher frequency of MACEs.

Posyandu Lansia merupakan layanan kesehatan berbasis masyarakat yang berperan penting dalam memantau kondisi kesehatan lansia secara rutin. Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mengetahui keaktifan lansia dalam mengikuti kegiatan Posyandu serta mengidentifikasi jenis pemeriksaan kesehatan yang tersedia. Penelitian ini menggunakan pendekatan kuantitatif deskriptif dengan jumlah responden sebanyak 53 orang lansia di Desa Kakara. Hasil penelitian menunjukkan bahwa sebagian besar lansia termasuk dalam kategori aktif mengikuti kegiatan Posyandu. Jenis pemeriksaan kesehatan yang paling umum diberikan meliputi pemeriksaan tekanan darah, berat badan, tinggi badan, dan gula darah. Sebanyak 67,9% responden menyatakan bahwa layanan pemeriksaan yang tersedia cukup lengkap. Hasil ini menunjukkan bahwa tingkat keaktifan lansia dipengaruhi oleh ketersediaan layanan dan dukungan keluarga. Oleh karena itu, penting untuk terus meningkatkan kualitas layanan Posyandu agar lansia tetap semangat dalam menjaga kesehatannya

innovative therapeutic strategies beyond conventional treatments. The increasing interest in natural and synthetic antiproliferative compounds is driven by their ability to target oncogenic pathways implicated in tumor progression, metastasis, and drug resistance. This review explores the potential of bioactive phytochemicals and molecularly targeted therapies, particularly EGFR inhibitors, in modulating cancer cell survival, proliferation, and immune evasion. A central focus is placed on the PI3Ks/AKT, JAK/STAT, and MEK/ ERK signaling pathways, which are frequently dysregulated in therapy-resistant cancers, particularly HNC.

In patients with gastric cancer, the risk of heart failure requiring hospitalization increased with worsening cancer stage. Even in young patients and those without metabolic risk factors, close monitoring for heart failure development following cancer treatment is essential.

Ushbu maqolada somatik huquqlar tushunchasining nazariy talqini hamda Germaniya va Oʻzbekiston huquq tizimlaridagi qiyosiy tahlili yoritiladi. Somatik huquqlarning kelib chiqishi, falsafiy asoslari va taʼriflari tahlil qilinadi. Xususan, insonning tanasi daxlsizligi va tanasi ustidan oʻz xohishiga koʻra qarorlar qabul qilish huquqi nazariy jihatdan Jon Rouls, Ronald Dvorkin kabi xorijiy olimlar hamda hamda oʻzbek huquqshunos olimlarning qarashlari orqali yoritiladi. Germaniya Federativ Respublikasi Konstitutsiyasida somatik huquqlarning muhofazasi, jumladan hayot va tana daxlsizligi huquqi va sud amaliyoti, shuningdek, Oʻzbekiston Respublikasi Konstitutsiyasi va qonunchiligida somatik huquqlarning nazariy asoslari koʻrib chiqiladi. Maqolada Germaniya va Oʻzbekiston tajribasi qiyoslanib, somatik huquqlar konsepsiyasining har ikki yurisdiksiyadagi oʻxshash va farqli jihatlari aniqlanadi. Xulosa oʻlaroq, somatik huquqlarni samarali huquqiy muhofaza qilish uchun inson qadri, tanasi daxlsizligi va bioetika tamoyillarini eʼtiborga olgan holda kompleks nazariy yondashuv zarurligi taʼkidlanadi.

Bu çalışma, Türkiye'de 2000-2024 yılları arasında yazılmış 69 yüksek lisans ve doktora tezini inceleyerek okul sosyal hizmeti alanındaki akademik üretimi bibliyografik analiz yöntemiyle değerlendirmeyi amaçlamaktadır. İçerik ve tematik analiz teknikleri kullanılarak tezlerin yıllara, üniversitelere, araştırma desenlerine, örneklem yöntemlerine, veri toplama ve analiz araçlarına göre dağılımı incelenmiştir. Bulgular, 2018 ve 2019 yıllarında bu alanda belirgin bir akademik artış olduğunu, çalışmaların çoğunlukla nicel yöntemle ve betimleyici yaklaşımla yürütüldüğünü göstermektedir. Tezlerde en sık öğrencilerle çalışılmış, öğretmen ve velilerin sürece sınırlı biçimde dahil edildiği görülmüştür. Konu başlıkları sıklıkla akran zorbalığı, okul terki, madde bağımlılığı, teknoloji kullanımı ve göçmen öğrencilerin uyumu gibi sorun odaklı temalara yoğunlaşmıştır. Araştırmalar, okul sosyal hizmeti uygulamasının Türkiye’de kurumsallaşma düzeyinin yetersiz olduğunu, bu alandaki mevzuat ve profesyonel uygulama eksikliklerini ortaya koymaktadır. Çalışma, uygulamaya dönük, çözüm ve politika üretme kapasitesi yüksek araştırmalara duyulan ihtiyacı vurgulamaktadır.

Objetivo: Analisar os efeitos do exercício físico na saúde e no bem-estar de mulheres durante a menopausa, levando em consideração os aspectos fisiológicos, emocionais e sociais que impactam profundamente essa fase hormonal feminina e influenciam sua qualidade de vida. Revisão biliográfica: A prática regular de exercícios físicos, especialmente os aeróbicos e resistidos, contribui para a redução de sintomas como fogachos, distúrbios do sono e alterações de humor, além de promover benefícios à saúde óssea, cardiovascular, metabólica e hormonal. Estudos recentes também apontam efeitos positivos sobre a composição corporal, a função cognitiva e a autoestima, favorecendo maior qualidade de vida, independência funcional e bem-estar psicológico. Considerações finais: O exercício físico configura-se como uma intervenção não farmacológica eficaz, segura e acessível, devendo ser incentivado como parte essencial do cuidado integral à mulher climatérica, com enfoque preventivo e humanizado, capaz de minimizar os impactos negativos deste período e promover um envelhecimento ativo e saudável.

Giriş E-okuryazarlık genel anlamıyla elektronik ortamda bulunan bilgileri anlamlandırma, değerlendirme ve etkili şekilde kullanma becerisidir. Günümüzde hastalar ve hasta yakınları, tanıları ve tedavi ile ilgili bilgileri internet ortamından elde etme eğilimindedir. Hastalar genellikle hangi web sitesine güveneceklerinden emin olamamakta ve gerçeği yansıtmayan yanıltıcı sağlık bilgilerine erişmekten endişe duymaktadır. Bu çalışmanın amacı çocuklarına Ter Testi ve Solunum Fonksiyon Testi yapılacak annelerin e-okur yazarlık ve kaygı düzeylerinin karşılaştırılmasıdır. Yöntem Çalışma, 30.03.2024-30.06.2024 tarihleri arasında Adana Şehir Eğitim ve Araştırma Hastanesi'nde gerçekleştirilmiş ve 108 anne çalışmaya katılmayı kabul etmiştir. Veri toplama araçları olarak Tanıtıcı Bilgi Formu, E-Okur Yazarlık Ölçeği ve Durumluk Kaygı Ölçeği kullanılmıştır. Bulgular Çalışmada e-okuryazarlık ve sürekli kaygı düzeyi arasında anlamlı bir ilişki bulunmamıştır. Annelerin çoğunluğunun testler hakkında bilgi sahibi olduğu ve bilgi sahibi olanların e-okur yazarlık düzeyinin daha yüksek olduğu görülmüştür. Testler hakkında bilgi sahibi olan annelerin durumluk kaygı düzeyi bilgi sahibi olmayanlara göre yüksek bulunmuştur. Annelerin KF ile ilgili bilgi kaynaklarının ek sık hemşireler (%43.7) olduğu bunu sırasıyla hekimlerin (%37.9) ve internetin (%18.4) takip ettiği belirlenmiştir. Sonuç Sonuç olarak, bu çalışma annelerin e-okuryazarlık düzeyi ile kaygı arasında anlamlı bir ilişki bulamamıştır. Çocuk sayısı ve akraba evliliği gibi faktörlerin etkisi olası olmakla birlikte, bu ilişkinin netleşmesi için daha kapsamlı araştırmalara ihtiyaç vardır. Hemşirelerin ebeveynler için en güvenilir bilgi kaynağı olması, danışmanlık ve eğitim rolünün önemini bir kez daha göstermektedir.

Latar Belakang: Stomatitis Aphthous Rekuren (SAR) merupakan kondisi inflamasi pada mukosa oral yang sering dijumpai dan menimbulkan nyeri sehingga mengganggu aktivitas sehari-hari. Selain faktor lokal, SAR dapat berasosiasi dengan kondisi sistemik tertentu, termasuk anemia defisiensi besi, terutama pada perempuan usia muda. Kasus: Seorang pasien perempuan berusia 19 tahun datang dengan keluhan sariawan berulang sejak masa remaja. Pemeriksaan intraoral menunjukkan adanya ulkus dangkal yang sesuai dengan gambaran SAR minor. Pemeriksaan darah lengkap menunjukkan anemia mikrositik dengan kadar hemoglobin di bawah nilai normal. Penatalaksanaan: Pasien diberikan terapi kortikosteroid topikal berupa triamcinolone acetonide untuk mengurangi inflamasi lokal, disertai dengan pemberian suplemen zat besi sebagai bagian dari penatalaksanaan kondisi sistemik yang mendasari. Evaluasi klinis setelah tujuh hari menunjukkan perbaikan lesi secara signifikan. Kesimpulan: Laporan kasus ini menegaskan pentingnya mempertimbangkan kondisi sistemik yang mendasari, khususnya anemia defisiensi besi, pada pasien perempuan usia muda dengan keluhan SAR berulang. Penatalaksanaan yang mencakup terapi lokal dan koreksi kondisi sistemik dapat memberikan hasil klinis yang optimal.

ABSTRACT Complications from intense pulsed light treatments are often attributed to the use of broad wavelength light and insufficient operator skill. This case series reviews four patients who experienced intense pulsed light (IPL) treat‐induced complications at cosmetic clinics across Melbourne, Australia. The findings aim to educate both clinicians and consumers about the common complications seen with IPL treatment, the potential severity of these complications and to offer recommendations to enhance the safety of IPL treatments for individuals with skin of colour.

Oxidative stress is a defining feature of stroke pathology, but the magnitude, timing and impact of redox imbalance are not static. Emerging evidence indicates that physiological contexts, such as aging, metabolic stress, and circadian disruption, continuously reshape oxidative status and determine the brain’s vulnerability to ischemic and reperfusion injury. This review integrates recent insights into how these intrinsic modulators govern the transition from adaptive physiological redox signaling to pathological oxidative stress during stroke. Aging compromises mitochondrial quality control and blunts NRF2-driven antioxidant responses, heightening susceptibility to ROS-driven damage. Metabolic dysfunction, as seen in obesity and diabetes, amplifies oxidative burden through NADPH oxidase activation, lipid peroxidation, and impaired glutathione recycling, further aggravating post-ischemic inflammation. Circadian misalignment, meanwhile, disrupts the rhythmic expression of antioxidant enzymes and metabolic regulators such as BMAL1, REV-ERBα, and SIRT1, constricting the brain’s temporal window of resilience. We highlight convergent signaling hubs, NRF2/KEAP1, SIRT–PGC1α, and AMPK pathways, as integrators of these physiological inputs that collectively calibrate redox homeostasis. Recognizing oxidative stress as a dynamic, context-dependent process reframes it from a static pathological state to a dynamic outcome of systemic and temporal imbalance, offering new opportunities for time-sensitive and metabolism-informed redox interventions in stroke.

Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are ubiquitous environmental endocrine disruptors (EDCs) that enter the human body through respiratory, digestive, and dermal exposure. Prolonged exposure has been associated with adverse health outcomes, including carcinogenicity, mutagenicity, and reproductive toxicity. However, whether genetic variation in apoptosis-related pathways modifies the reproductive effects of PAH exposure remains unclear. To investigate gene-environment interactions between urinary PAH metabolites and polymorphisms in apoptosis-related genes in relation to sperm apoptosis, we conducted a cross-sectional study involving 176 male participants from an infertility clinic in Wuhan, China, who completed structured questionnaires and provided biological samples. Ten OH-PAH metabolites in repeated urine samples were measured, along with genotyping of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at apoptosis-related genes (Fas, FasL, and caspase-3) in whole blood DNA, and sperm apoptosis. Multivariable linear regression evaluated the interaction between urinary OH-PAH levels and apoptotic gene SNPs on apoptotic sperm, with genotype-stratified analyses. PAH exposure appeared to interact with SNPs in FasL rs763110, Fas rs2234767, and caspase-3 rs12108497 to jointly influence sperm cell apoptosis. Specifically, for the FasL rs763110, higher 9-OHFlu was associated with fewer viable sperm and more apoptotic sperm, and this association was more pronounced among CC genotype homozygotes. For the caspase-3 rs12108497, higher 2-OHFlu was associated with more dead sperm, and this association was significant among TC and TC/CC genotypes. These findings suggest that genetic variation in apoptosis-related genes may modify susceptibility to PAH-induced sperm apoptosis, highlighting the importance of gene–environment interactions in male reproductive toxicity.

Background: The aim of the study is (1) to assess safety of opioids in nursing mothers after cesarean delivery and in breastfed infants and (2) to evaluate the role of CYP2D6 genetics in maternal and infant clinical outcomes after cesarean delivery. Methods: A total of 210 mother–infant dyads were enrolled after cesarean delivery. Oxycodone 5 mg orally was administered every 4–6 h as needed as part of a standardized opioid-sparing ERAS protocol. Primary outcomes were opioid-related adverse effects, including maternal respiratory depression (RD) and postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) and neonatal composite side effects (i.e., RD monitoring, sedation, and limpness). Results: In total, 77% of mothers received opioids during postpartum hospital stay, none experienced respiratory depression, 13% reported PONV, and composite opioid-related side effects were observed in 13% of neonates. Compared to mothers without opioid consumption, higher in-hospital opioid consumption was borderline significantly associated with a higher risk of neonatal composite side effects (adjusted relative risk, aRR = 3.79; 95%CI: 1.01–14.28; p = 0.07), with a similar trend toward higher risk in maternal PONV (aRR = 2.56; 95%CI: 0.70–9.29; p = 0.36). Mothers with a CYP2D6 ultra-rapid metabolizer phenotype also showed higher rates of PONV and neonatal composite side effects compared with normal or intermediate phenotypes, although these associations were not statistically significant. Conclusions: Higher maternal in-hospital opioid consumption is associated with a higher risk of neonatal composite side effects. Using the lowest effective doses of opioids as needed could reduce the risk of opioid-related side effects in neonates. Preoperative genotyping may help identify mothers and breastfed neonates at increased risk for opioid-related adverse outcomes. Additional studies are needed to evaluate preoperative genotyping and to evaluate the causality of increased neonatal adverse outcomes.

Abstract The brain age gap (BAG) — the difference between chronological and neuroimaging-based predicted brain age — has emerged as a sensitive biomarker of brain health. A higher BAG, reflecting an older-appearing brain, has been linked to cognitive decline, neurodegenerative disease, and mental disorders. Whether such apparent aging can be mitigated by targeted interventions remains unclear. Oestradiol (E2), a sex hormone fluctuating across the menstrual cycle and known for its neuromodulatory and cognitive effects, may represent one such target intervention. To test this, we conducted a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled crossover study in 28 premenopausal females. Each participant was assessed twice during the follicular phase, with at least two cycles between sessions, and received either 12 mg E2-valerate or a placebo before undergoing a T1-weighted MRI scan. BAG was estimated using a pre-trained Simple Fully Convolutional Network model. Predicted brain age was significantly younger following E2 administration compared to placebo. Exploratory analyses indicated that this effect may be moderated by resilience factors for mental health: Higher self-esteem and use of greater social support seeking was nominally associated with lower BAG, whereas females applying more expressive suppression showed more apparent brain aging. These findings suggest that even short-term increases in E2, together with resilience factors, can influence brain age estimates. Thus, E2 interventions may provide a targeted approach to support both brain and mental health. These findings underscore the urgent need for further research into the impact of E2 on mental health across the female lifespan.

Background: Cancer is burden for almost all societies in the world. It is estimated that approximately 20 million persons are suffering with cancer and every year 10 million die due to cancer. Methods: A descriptive and comparative survey from January 2024 to June 2024 with a quantitative research approach was used. The non-probability convenient sampling technique was used, and 60 nurses (30 each from Cancer Hospital; and General Hospital) had given consent for participation in the study. The tools used for data collection were personal profile, structured knowledge questionnaire, modified Likert-type attitude scale, and opinionnaire for utility of SIM. Results: The study found that 83.35% of General Hospital and Cancer Hospital nurses had strong knowledge, while 10% and 6.66% had low knowledge. All nurses from both institutions have mildly positive to extremely positive thoughts about how oral cancer affects oral hygiene and nutrition. Mean knowledge scores of nurses from General and Cancer hospitals were 14.73 and 16.33, and mean attitude scores were 149.80 and 150.20. Cancer hospital nurses' expertise and attitude correlated significantly. The results show that 86.67% of nurses believe SIM is a valuable source of information and content to assist them better manage oral cancer patients' oral hygiene and nutrition. Conclusions: The study found that cancer hospital nurses had a higher mean knowledge score than general hospital nurses. Thus, knowledge and attitude are linked, and nurses with higher knowledge have a more positive attitude.

Pancreatic cancer (PC) is a malignant tumor of the digestive system with high malignancy and poor prognosis. It is characterized by difficulty in early diagnosis, rapid disease progression, unfavorable prognosis, high mortality rate, and low 5-year survival rate. As one of the major diseases threatening human health, PC still lacks effective treatment methods. By retrieving relevant articles over the years, this study summarizes and analyzes that the pathogenesis of PC involves multiple factors, including heredity and gene mutations, DNA methyltransferases and histone deacetylases in epigenetic abnormalities, and the tumor microenvironment. Furthermore, the key targets of PC pathogenesis and the tumor microenvironment are analyzed, aiming to provide further references for the treatment of PC.

Background: Colorectal carcinoma (CRC) is one of the most common cancers worldwide and is associated with a high mortality rate due to its rapid progression. Hematological tests are one of the most commonly and frequently done investigations throughout the course of illness, due to its easy availability and cost effectiveness. Aims and Objectives: The objective of this study was to study the hematological profile of CRC patients and assess its correlation with histopathological parameters. Materials and Methods: A cross- sectional study was done with 72 CRC patients. The blood samples of all the study subjects were run through automated hematology analyzers and complete blood count were obtained. The CRC specimens were grossed, examined microscopically, and reported according to the college of American pathologists protocol. Results: All the available information was meticulously documented in tables and charts and statistical analysis was done by Chi-square test using the Statistical Package for the Social Science version 27.0. Conclusion: There is a strong correlation between hematological and histopathological parameters in CRC patients. Lymphopenia, high red cell distribution width, anemia, and platelet activation proved to be associated with more severe disease. Hematological ratios and indexes can act as a guiding tool for proper screening, diagnosis, prognosis, and management of the CRC patients.

Digital addiction is a behavioural addiction that develops as a result of the uncontrolled and excessive use of online platforms such as the internet, smartphones, digital games, and social media. This condition, which is increasingly prevalent among adolescents and young adults, has become a significant public health issue, negatively impacting individual functioning. This review comprehensively examines the epidemiological characteristics, neurobiological foundations, diagnostic criteria, and the relationship between digital addiction and comorbid psychiatric disorders. Neuroimaging studies have revealed structural and functional changes in the frontal lobe, particularly the prefrontal cortex, in individuals with digital addiction. Moreover, dysfunctions in the dopaminergic reward system provide a crucial biological basis for explaining impairments in impulse control and reward expectancy observed in these individuals. Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) is central to the treatment process, while exercise-based interventions and novel approaches such as repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) play a supplementary role. Early intervention programmes, supported by multidisciplinary teams, are of paramount importance in mitigating the individual, familial, and societal burdens associated with digital addiction. One of the most effective strategies for addressing this issue is the early implementation of diagnostic tools alongside cognitive behavioural therapy interventions. It is crucial to raise digital awareness within communities, strengthen educational initiatives aimed at reducing risky usage, and promote healthy digital habits. Mitigating the individual and societal impacts of digital addiction will require a coordinated and holistic approach across health, education, and social policy sectors.

Abstract Spontaneous tendon rupture occurs in a concerning number of individuals with chronic kidney disease (CKD); however almost no data exist regarding CKD‐related tendon pathology. Given that tendon ruptures have a significant impact on health and well‐being we sought to determine whether tendon mechanics are altered by kidney disease in an established rat model of CKD. Male and female Sprague–Dawley rats (age = 8 weeks) were equally divided into a control group (CON, n = 16) and a group fed a diet containing 0.25% adenine to induce kidney disease ( ADI CKD). After 9 weeks, Achilles and tibialis anterior (TA) tendons were excised, and maximum tensile load (MTL), failure stress, modulus and cross‐sectional area (CSA) were measured and evaluated by two‐way ANOVA (main effects: CKD and sex). CKD was confirmed through elevated creatinine (1.99 vs . 0.61 mg/dl, CKD vs . CON, P &lt; 0.001) and blood urea nitrogen (93.4 vs . 21.4 mg/dl, P &lt; 0.001). Plantar flexor strength was 13% lower in ADI CKD ( P = 0.0214), and femur yield force was decreased by 41% in male ADI CKD ( P &lt; 0.001). The failure stress of TA tendons was 24% lower in CKD vs . CON ( P = 0.0383). There were no statistically significant differences in TA tendon MTL, modulus or CSA. There were no significant main effects for any parameter for the Achilles; however, post hoc testing following a finding of group‐by‐sex interactions revealed that in females Achilles failure stress was decreased in ADI CKD by 25% ( P = 0.0283). To our knowledge this is the first direct evidence that tendon weakness is caused by kidney disease, providing a model for further evaluating mechanisms and interventions. image Key points Chronic kidney disease is well known to lead to musculoskeletal dysfunction, such as bone and muscle wasting. Numerous case reports suggest that chronic kidney disease may also predispose patients to catastrophic tendon injuries; however, there are no mechanistic studies or animal models addressing this phenomenon – and thus, no treatments. We determined whether a rat model of chronic kidney disease previously used to study muscle and bone dysfunction (0.25% adenine in the diet) would also cause impaired tendon function. Eight weeks of adenine‐induced kidney disease caused tibialis anterior tendons to tear at 24% lower stress than in control animals, while also decreasing plantar flexor muscle strength by 13% and femur strength by 41% (males only). This is the first experimental evidence for a direct effect of chronic kidney disease on tendon function, establishing a comprehensive multitissue model for future research.

The PRISMA extension for Scoping Reviews (PRISMA-ScR) was followed. Prospero does not accept protocols for scoping reviews.

The management of dentofacial deformities in completely edentulous patients remains one of the most demanding challenges in maxillofacial surgery due to the absence of occlusal references and severe bone resorption. This systematic review, conducted in accordance with PRISMA guidelines, critically analyzed available evidence on the planning and execution of orthognathic surgery in this population. A comprehensive search of 8 databases identified 8 eligible studies encompassing 34 fully edentulous patients. Le Fort I osteotomy was the predominant procedure (91%), frequently combined with bone grafting and implant-supported rehabilitation (74%). Bilateral sagittal split osteotomy, maxillomandibular advancement, and distraction osteogenesis were less frequent. Digital workflows using virtual planning, CAD/CAM guides, and patient-specific implants demonstrated high positional accuracy (≤1.5 mm) and favorable esthetic and functional outcomes. Reported complications were minimal, including 9 implant losses (7.9%) and a single corrected maxillary relapse. Despite the feasibility and promising results, current evidence remains limited and heterogeneous, precluding robust clinical recommendations. Standardized, prospective studies integrating digital and prosthetic protocols are essential to consolidate orthognathic surgery as a safe and reproducible option for the rehabilitation of edentulous patients.

Penelitian terkait penggunaan obat off label di Indonesia mayoritas terfokus pada pasien pediatri daripada pasien obstetri dan ginekologi. Padahal penggunaan off label pada pasien obstetri dan ginekologi perlu mendapat perhatian khusus karena perlu memperhatikan banyak aspek kondisi pasien. Pada kondisi hamil umumnya obat-obatan dapat melintasi plasenta sehingga dapat memengaruhi kondisi janin (Wibowo et al. 2021). Penelitian di Inggris menemukan mayoritas resep yang digunakan secara off label beresiko tinggi bagi pasien dan dokter yang meresepkan (Herring, McManus, and Weeks 2010). Kemungkinan terjadinya pravalensi tinggi terkait penggunaan obat-obat off label pada pasien obstetri dan ginekologi sehingga perlu dilakukan penelitian terkait persepsi dan kecenderungan keterlibatan apoteker pada peresepan obat - obat off label pada pasien obstetri dan ginekologi. Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mengembangkan alat evaluasi terhadap persepsi dan kecenderungan apoteker dalam peresepan obat-obat off label pada pasien obstetri dan ginekologi, dalam hal ini berupa kuesioner. Kuesioner dikembangkan berdasarkan beberapa aspek yang ditemukan dalam kajian pustaka terpublikasi. Uji validitas rupa dan uji validitas konten kuesioner dilakukan dengan penilaian expert judgement, sedangkan uji validasi konstruk dilakukan dengan uji korelasi. Uji reliabilitas kuesioner dilakukan dengan menggunakan nilai Cronbach’s Alpha. Penelitian ini menghasilkan kuesioner yang terdiri dari 46 item pernyataan yang dibagi menjadi beberapa variasi. Setelah melalui beberapa uji validitas dan reliabilitas didapatkan kuesioner yang valid dan reliabel dengan nilai R Corrected item-Total Correlation &gt; 0,200 dari masing-masing pernyataan, diperoleh nilai Cronbach’s Alpha sebesar 0,906 sehingga dapat digunakan dalam pengujian selanjutnya.Kata kunci: Off label, Obstetri dan Ginekologi, Persepsi, Apoteker

Hemiarthroplasty addresses joint damage confined to one side, preserving native cartilage and bone, but accelerated degeneration of the opposing cartilage can compromise outcomes. This systematic review should clarify whether coefficient of friction (COF) reliably predicts cartilage wear when evaluating hemiarthroplasty bearing materials (HBMs). Thirty in vitro studies reporting both outcomes were identified. Data were extracted on COF, wear, and testing parameters, and wear was standardized using a 0–4 rubric to enable cross-study comparison. Three analytical approaches were applied: linear model fits, Pearson’s correlations, and predictive modeling. Reported COFs increased significantly with testing time, while contact stress and sliding velocity showed variable associations with COF. Predictive models for cobalt–chromium (CoCr), the most studied HBM, showed moderate fit, suggesting that mechanical parameters explain only part of COF variability. For wear, linear models showed poor fit with COF, but correlations indicated positive associations with contact stress. Inconsistent effects of velocity and distance were found. Predictive models explained little variability. Together, these findings suggest that outcomes are strongly influenced by testing conditions, lubricants, and HBM selection, and COF alone is an unreliable predictor of cartilage wear in an experimental setting.

Background: Eating disorders are prevalent psychiatric conditions characterized by abnormal eating behaviors, body image disturbances, and significant health consequences. Previous studies have shown rising rates among young adults, particularly university students. Objective: This study aimed to assess the frequency of eating disorder risk among undergraduate students. Methods: A cross-sectional survey was conducted among 114 undergraduate students. Demographic data were collected, and participants completed the SCOFF questionnaire to screen for risk of eating disorders. Responses were analyzed descriptively, and chi-square tests were used to compare observed proportions against expected distributions. Results: The mean age of participants was 21.42 ± 1.8 years, with females comprising 62.4% of the sample. Overall, 72 (63.2%) students showed a potential risk for eating disorders. Specifically, 42 (36.8%) reported making themselves sick due to feeling uncomfortably full (p = 0.005), 48 (42.1%) worried about loss of control over eating (p = 0.092), 18 (15.8%) had lost more than one stone in 3 months (p &lt; 0.0001), 42 (36.8%) perceived themselves as fat when others said they were too thin (p = 0.005), and 66 (57.9%) felt that food dominated their lives (p = 0.092). Conclusion: A considerable proportion of undergraduate students exhibited behaviors suggestive of eating disorder risk, particularly self-induced vomiting, perceived fatness, and rapid weight loss. These findings underscore the importance of early screening and preventive interventions in this population.

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is increasingly associated with metabolic disorders, particularly dyslipidemia, which contributes to cardiovascular risk and disease progression. Understanding this relationship is essential for early intervention. Objectives: To assess the frequency of dyslipidemia and its association with clinical and biochemical parameters in NAFLD patients. Methods: A cross-sectional study was carried out at the Department of Medicine, Jinnah Hospital, Lahore, from November 2024 to April 2025. A total of 116 ultrasonographically confirmed NAFLD patients aged 18–70 years were registered using non-probability consecutive sampling. Patients with secondary causes of liver disease, lipid-altering medications, or systemic illnesses were excluded. Results: Among the 116 NAFLD participants, the average age was 48.67 ± 11.57 years, and the mean body mass index (BMI) was 28.27 ± 4.60 kg/m². Dyslipidemia was present in 72 (62.1%) of participants. Females comprised 44 (61.1%) of the dyslipidemic group, and 44 (61.1%) were aged 46–70 years. Diabetes mellitus and ischemic heart disease were significantly associated with dyslipidemia (p=0.016 and p=0.004, respectively). Biochemical markers, including BMI (p=0.002), AST (p=0.012), and ALT (p=0.041), were significantly elevated in dyslipidemic patients. Lipid profile abnormalities, such as total cholesterol, triglycerides, and LDL-C, were significantly higher, while HDL-C was lower (all p&lt;0.001). Dyslipidemia prevalence increased with NAFLD severity grade (p&lt;0.001). Conclusion: Dyslipidemia is prevalent in NAFLD and significantly correlates with disease severity and metabolic comorbidities, highlighting the need for integrated lipid and hepatic assessment in clinical management.

BACKGROUND The prevalence of negative emotional states, such as anxiety and depression, has increased annually. Although personal habits are known to influence emotional regulation, the precise mechanisms underlying this relationship remain unclear. AIM To investigate emotion regulation habits impact on students negative emotions during lockdown, using the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic as a case example. METHODS During the coronavirus disease 2019 lockdown, an online cross-sectional survey was conducted at a Chinese university. Emotional states were assessed using the Depression, Anxiety, and Stress Scale-21 (DASS-21), while demographic data and emotion regulation habits were collected concurrently. Data analysis was performed using SPSS version 27.0 and included χ 2-tests for intergroup comparisons, Spearman’s rank-order correlation coefficient analysis to examine associations, and stepwise linear regression modeling to explore the relationships between emotion regulation habits and emotional states. Statistical significance was set at α = 0.05. RESULTS Among the 494 valid questionnaires analyzed, the prevalence rates of negative emotional states were as follows: Depression (65.0%), anxiety (69.4%), and stress (50.8%). DASS-21 scores (mean ± SD) demonstrated significant symptomatology: Total (48.77 ± 34.88), depression (16.21 ± 12.18), anxiety (14.90 ± 11.91), and stress (17.64 ± 12.07). Significant positive intercorrelations were observed among all DASS-21 subscales (P &lt; 0.01). Regression analysis identified key predictors of negative emotions (P &lt; 0.05): Risk factors included late-night frequency and academic pressure, while protective factors were the frequency of parental contact and the number of same-gender friends. Additionally, compensatory spending and binge eating positively predicted all negative emotion scores (β &gt; 0, P &lt; 0.01), whereas appropriate recreational activities negatively predicted these scores (β &lt; 0, P &lt; 0.01). CONCLUSION High negative emotion prevalence occurred among confined students. Recreational activities were protective, while compensatory spending and binge eating were risk factors, necessitating guided emotion regulation.

Bu makale, 19. yüzyıl Fransası’nda özellikle Épinal kasabasında üretilen taş baskıların (litografi) kolektif imgelem ve popüler kültür üzerindeki etkilerini kapsamlı bir biçimde incelemektedir. Épinal baskıları, renkli, ucuz ve geniş halk kitlelerine ulaşabilen görsel objeler olarak dikkat çekmektedir. Bu baskılar, dini, tarihsel, kahramanlık ve mizahi temaları bir araya getirerek hem eğitsel hem de eğlendirici işlevler üstlenmiş, böylece toplumun kültürel hafızasında kalıcı bir etki bırakmıştır. Makale, bu baskıların ikonografik özelliklerini çözümleyerek, kitlesel görsel kültürün oluşumunda oynadıkları merkezi rolü tartışmaktadır. Araştırma kapsamında, Épinal baskıların görsel dilinin incelenmesi ön plana çıkmaktadır. Basit çizgi kullanımı, canlı renkler ve anlaşılır kompozisyonlar, bu görsellerin teknik olarak erişilebilir olmasının yanı sıra, farklı sosyoekonomik sınıflardan bireyler tarafından kolayca benimsenmesini sağlamıştır. Bu durum, popüler belleğin ve kolektif imgelemin oluşumunda baskıların etkisinin anlaşılmasına olanak tanımaktadır. Makale, baskıların sadece estetik birer nesne olmadığını; aynı zamanda toplumun değerlerini, sosyal normlarını ve kahramanlık anlayışını şekillendiren kültürel araçlar olduğunu göstermektedir. Özellikle erkeklik, kadınlık ve toplumsal cinsiyet temsilleri açısından Épinal baskılarının sunduğu kalıplar, dönemin sosyal yapısına dair önemli ipuçları vermektedir. Vaka analizi yöntemine dayanan çalışmada, belirli baskı örneklerinin tematik ve kültürel işlevleri ayrıntılı bir şekilde ele alınmaktadır. Bu analizler, baskıların tarih anlatıları ve kahramanlık motifleri aracılığıyla halkın kolektif belleğine nasıl etki ettiğini, mizahi ve didaktik içeriklerle toplumsal değerleri nasıl pekiştirdiğini ortaya koymaktadır. Ayrıca, Épinal baskılarının ticari yönü ve kitlesel üretim kapasitesi, popüler kültürün demokratikleşmesine katkı sağlayan bir araç olarak işlev görmesini mümkün kılmıştır. Sonuç olarak, makale Épinal taş baskılarının litografi teknolojisi ile birleşerek popüler kültürü geniş kitlelere ulaştırma sürecinde oynadığı merkezi rolü vurgulamaktadır. Bu bağlamda, görsel kültür ile kolektif imgelem arasındaki etkileşimin tarihsel bir perspektifte değerlendirilmesi, baskıların hem sanatsal hem de toplumsal boyutlarını anlamak açısından önem taşımaktadır. Épinal baskıları, basit teknik ve estetik özelliklerinin ötesinde, toplumun kültürel hafızasını şekillendiren, popüler kültürün erken dönem örneklerinden biri olarak değerlendirilmektedir.

The iHCG-Net can be a promising interpretable artificial intelligence tool for the preoperative prediction of HCC grading.

Üreme sağlığı, bireylerin yalnızca hastalık veya yetersizlikten uzak olması değil; fiziksel, ruhsal ve sosyal açıdan tam bir iyilik hâlini ifade eden temel bir insan hakkıdır. Aile planlaması ise üreme sağlığının ayrılmaz bir bileşeni olup, bireylerin istedikleri zamanda ve sayıda çocuk sahibi olabilmelerini sağlayan bilgi, hizmet ve yöntemleri kapsamaktadır. Bu bağlamda ebeler, gebelik öncesi danışmanlık, antenatal ve postnatal bakım, doğum kontrol yöntemleri hakkında danışmanlık ve cinsel sağlık eğitimi sunarak anne, bebek ve toplum sağlığının geliştirilmesinde kilit bir rol üstlenmektedir. Ebelerin rolü yalnızca klinik uygulamalarla sınırlı olmayıp; eğitim, danışmanlık, savunuculuk ve araştırma boyutlarını da içermektedir. Toplum temelli çalışmaları sayesinde istenmeyen gebeliklerin önlenmesine katkı sağlamakta, bireylerin bilinçli ve hak temelli kararlar almasını desteklemektedirler. Ayrıca göçmenler ve dezavantajlı gruplar gibi kırılgan nüfuslara yönelik kültürel açıdan duyarlı hizmet sunarak sağlık eşitsizliklerinin azaltılmasına katkıda bulunmaktadırlar. Güncel yaklaşımlar kapsamında dijital sağlık uygulamaları ve yenilikçi eğitim modelleri, ebelerin hizmet sunum kapasitesini artırmaktadır. Sonuç olarak, ebelerin çok boyutlu rolleri sürdürülebilir sağlık sistemlerinin güçlendirilmesi, anne-bebek ölümlerinin azaltılması ve toplum sağlığının geliştirilmesi açısından kritik öneme sahiptir.

Quantitative <sup>99m</sup>Tc-MDP SPECT/CT is an efficient technique for predicting NACT efficacy in OS.

Objective: Patients with systolic heart failure frequently exhibit markedly reduced vitamin D levels; however, the clinical benefits of correcting this deficiency remain uncertain. This study aimed to evaluate the effects of high-dose vitamin D replacement therapy on cardiac function and exercise capacity in individuals with reduced ejection fraction and documented vitamin D deficiency. Methods: In this prospective observational study, patients with low ejection fraction and confirmed vitamin D deficiency received high-dose vitamin D replacement therapy. Throughout the follow-up period, serum vitamin D concentrations, six-minute walk test performance, cardiac imaging parameters (including left ventricular systolic function and chamber dimensions), and laboratory measures such as calcium and parathyroid hormone levels were monitored. Results: Vitamin D concentrations increased steadily after replacement therapy. Participants demonstrated a significant improvement in functional capacity, walking nearly 100 meters farther on average during the six-minute walk test. Echocardiographic evaluation revealed enhanced left ventricular contractility and reduced cavity size, whereas atrial and right ventricular parameters remained largely unchanged. Serum calcium and parathyroid hormone levels remained stable. Conclusion: Restoration of vitamin D levels in patients with systolic heart failure may lead to improved daily performance and favorable structural remodeling of the left ventricle. Further large-scale studies are warranted to determine whether these benefits translate into improved long-term clinical outcomes.

Background: Overuse and misuse of antibiotics in human and farmed animals is the key risk factor for accelerating antimicrobial resistance worldwide. The study aimed at the detection and characterization of E. coli associated with enteric infections in goats of Chhattisgarh, India with its antibiogram and related pathology. Methods: The work was carried out in the Department of Veterinary Pathology, College of Veterinary Sciences and Animal Husbandry, Durg, Chhattisgarh, from December 2021 to July 2024. A total of 274 naturally died goats were screened for enteric lesions, irrespective of age and sex. Faecal samples and swabs were collected for bacteriological examination. Intestinal tissue samples were collected for molecular, histopathological and ultrastructural study. Disc diffusion technique and Congo red agar method were used for antibiogram and biofilm assay, respectively. Result: The prevalence of E. coli isolates in goats, died due to enteric infection was 32.45%, based on the PCR results targeting the ecp gene. The 16s rRNA gene sequencing showed 99-99.4% homology with the genome sequences available in NCBI database. The phylogenetic analysis revealed the highest similarities of E. coli isolate of this study with the isolates of Telangana (India), Iraq and China. The study revealed 83.78% of E. coli isolates as biofilm producers and 64% isolates showed multidrug resistance. Various degenerative, inflammatory and necrotic lesions were seen in the intestine. In conclusion, the emergence of antibiotic resistant E. coli in goats poses a serious threat to public health.

A considerable number of people are exposed to noise from military aircraft daily, but its health effects have not been sufficiently examined. This study assessed the association of exposure to such noise with mental well-being and sleep disturbance among people living in Okinawa prefecture, where there are two U.S. military air bases. In 2024, data were collected from 394 residents in high-, low-, and no-exposure communities using the WHO-5 Well-being Index and the Athens Insomnia Scale. Among respondents, 55.8% were female; the largest age groups were 70’s (25.4%) and 60’s (23.6%). Poor mental well-being and sleep disturbance were most prevalent in the high-exposure community (poor mental well-being: 38.2%, sleep disturbance: 46.6%), followed by low-exposure (36.1%, 46.3%) and no-exposure (21.9%, 29.0%) communities. Multivariate logistic regression analyses showed that compared to no-exposure community, the high-exposure and low-exposure communities were significantly more likely to have poor mental well-being (odds ratio (OR): 1.84, 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.05–3.23; OR: 1.94, 95% CI: 1.05–3.56), as well as sleep disturbance (OR: 1.98, 95% CI: 1.17–3.35; OR: 2.04; 95% CI: 1.16–3.59, respectively). The results suggest that there is a substantial need to address the noise from military aircraft in Okinawa.

Background: Total abdominal hysterectomy (TAH) is commonly associated with significant postoperative pain. Multimodal analgesia incorporating regional blocks is now the standard of care. Among these, the lumbar erector spinae plane (ESP) block and anterior quadratus lumborum (AQL) block are frequently used. Objectives: To compare the efficacy of anterior quadratus lumborum (AQL) block and lumbar erector spinae plane (ESP) block in providing postoperative analgesia for patients undergoing TAH. Methods: This prospective, randomized, double-blind interventional study included 44 patients undergoing TAH. Participants were randomly assigned to receive either a bilateral AQL block (Group A) or a bilateral lumbar ESP block (Group B) before surgery, under ultrasound guidance. All patients underwent general anesthesia. Pain was assessed postoperatively at regular intervals over 24 hours using the Visual Analogue Scale (VAS). Additional analgesic requirements and any complications were documented. Results: Group A (AQL block) had a significantly longer mean duration of analgesia (8.5 ± 0.96 hours) compared to Group B (ESP block, 7.5 ± 1.09 hours; p = 0.00411). Total analgesic consumption in the first 24 hours was also lower in Group A (mean 2.36 ± 0.49) versus Group B (3.23 ± 0.68; p &lt; 0.00001). No block-related complications were noted. Conclusion: The AQL block provided statistically superior postoperative analgesia compared to the lumbar ESP block in patients undergoing TAH. However, the clinical difference in analgesic duration was marginal. Either block may be employed based on clinician expertise and institutional protocol.

<title>Abstract</title> <bold>Background</bold> : Blood donation is a critical healthcare activity that saves millions of lives globally, yet access to timely donations remains a challenge in Ethiopia, particularly during emergencies. Identifying the socio-demographic, psychological, and contextual factors that influence blood donation is essential for developing strategies to improve donation rates and ensure a sustainable blood supply. This study investigates the factors influencing blood donation practices among adults in East Gojjam Zone, Ethiopia, over the past two years. <bold>Methods</bold> : A cross-sectional survey was conducted with 1,332 adults selected through multistage cluster sampling in East Gojjam Zone. Descriptive statistics were used to summarize donation behaviors, while Zero-Inflated Negative Binomial (ZINB) regression identified factors associated with donation frequency. Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) explored the relationships between donation behaviors and key predictors. <bold>Results</bold> : Among participants, 28.8% (95% CI: 26.4%-31.2%) had donated blood at least once, and 20.7% (95% CI: 18.5%-22.9%) had donated in the past two years. Frequent donation was positively associated with younger age, male gender, higher education, and employment in healthcare or education. Altruism, specifically the desire to help others, was the primary motivation for donation. Psychological barriers, including fear of needles, health concerns, and lack of awareness, were significant deterrents. ZINB regression revealed that psychological barriers negatively influenced donation frequency, while previous donation experience, awareness, and participation in campaigns were positive predictors. SEM analysis showed that donation intention had the strongest direct effect on donation behavior, with self-efficacy, positive attitudes, and social norms also contributing significantly. <bold>Conclusions</bold> : Donation rates were lower than expected, with few participants donating repeatedly. This study highlights the complex interaction of socio-demographic, psychological, and contextual factors influencing blood donation behavior. Interventions should address psychological barriers, enhance awareness, and foster altruism to increase donation rates. Public health campaigns should target vulnerable groups, including women, older adults, and individuals with lower educational attainment. Additionally, improving donation site accessibility, offering incentives, and leveraging social networks can help boost donations. Continuous evaluation and adaptation of strategies are essential to meet the growing demand for blood.

Background: Cervical cancer is a major public health concern in Kenya, accounting for 12% of all cancer cases and being the leading cause of cancer-related deaths. This study aimed to identify the socioeconomic status and health awareness determinants of cervical cancer screening uptake among women aged 25-49 years in Kiambu town sub-county, Kiambu County, Kenya. Methods: A descriptive cross-sectional design was used in this study, where both qualitative and quantitative data were obtained for purposes of triangulation. Multi-stage sampling technique was utilized to select study participants. Both chi-square and binary logistic regression were used to identify socioeconomic status and health awareness determinants associated with cervical cancer screening uptake. SPSS version 29 was used in quantitative data analysis. The cutoff for statistical significance was p≤0.05. Qualitative data were analyzed thematically. Results: Cervical cancer screening uptake was at 40.2%. Earning between Ksh 20,001-30,000 (OR=5.4, 95% CI; 2.074-6.464, p&lt;0.001), being married (OR=1.8,95% CI; 1.343-9.790, p=0.03), awareness of cervical cancer (OR=2.4, 95% CI; 1.342-4.122, p=0.003), and awareness of signs and symptoms (OR=1.5, 95% CI; 1.154-2.704, p=0.01) increased the odds of cervical cancer screening. Conversely, younger women aged 25-29 years (OR=0.22, 95% CI; 0.243-0.846, p=0.023) had reduced odds of cervical cancer screening uptake. Conclusions: The uptake of cervical cancer screening was low among women aged 25-49 years in Kiambu sub-county. Awareness of cervical cancer signs and symptoms, awareness of cervical cancer, study respondents’ age, marital status income were socioeconomic status and health awareness predictors of cervical cancer screening. Efforts should be put in place to enhance awareness of cervical cancer.

Background: Preschool children in Indonesia continue to experience developmental challenges. National data indicate that fewer than half of children aged 1–59 months receive standardized developmental monitoring. At the same time, increased access to digital devices has made screen time a routine part of early childhood, potentially reducing opportunities for physical play that are essential for fine motor skill development. Objective: To examine the association between screen-time duration and fine motor development among children aged 2–5 years in the service areas of the Sikumana and Tarus Community Health Centers. Methods: This study employed an analytic correlational design with a cross-sectional approach. A total of 55 children aged 24–60 months were recruited using consecutive sampling. Screen-time duration was assessed using a questionnaire adapted from the SMALL-Q, while fine motor development was evaluated using age-specific fine motor items from the Developmental Pre-Screening Questionnaire (Kuesioner Pra Skrining Perkembangan/KPSP). Data were analyzed using the Spearman rank correlation test. Results: The results showed that 54.5% of children were exposed to excessive screen time (&gt;60 minutes/day), and 63.6% demonstrated fine motor development that was not appropriate for their age. A significant moderate negative correlation was observed between screen-time duration and fine motor development (r = −0.449; p = 0.001). Children with excessive screen time had a substantially lower proportion of age-appropriate fine motor development (16.7%) compared with children who adhered to recommended screen-time limits (60%). Conclusion: There is a significant and moderately strong association between screen-time duration and fine motor development among children aged 2–5 years. Parental education on limiting screen time and ensuring active supervision is crucial to support optimal fine motor development in early childhood.

Treatment of neuropathic pain (NP) remains a challenge in clinical practice because the current treatment approaches produce satisfactory pain alleviation in only 30% of patients. This necessitates developing novel drugs or repurposing existing medications intended to manage other diseases. When the repurposing intendance is chosen, similarity in the pharmacological properties should be hosted by the candidate drugs. Herein, this review sheds light on the mechanisms of certain centrally acting skeletal muscle relaxants (CMRs), specifically tolperisone. So far, data indicate that tolperisone displays voltage-gated sodium channel (VGSC) blocking properties with modulatory effect on voltage-gated calcium channels (VGCCs). These properties have led to recent preclinical research initiatives testing tolperisone in NP, resulting in positive outcomes. Furthermore, the review highlights the currently available VGSC blockers and proposes a strategy based on combining them with VGCC blockers that have been proven for the treatment of NP. This proposal is supported by the fact that tolperisone, in combination with pregabalin, has recently been shown to acutely halt NP.

Bu araştırmanın temel amacı, Türk imalat sanayi alt sektörlerinde sermaye yapısını belirleyen işletmeye özgü değişkenlerin etkilerini analiz etmektir. Bu kapsamda, Türkiye Cumhuriyet Merkez Bankası tarafından yayımlanan sektör bilançoları kullanılarak, imalat sektöründe faaliyet gösteren 22 alt sektörün 2009-2023 dönemine ait panel veri seti oluşturulmuştur. Elde edilen veriler doğrultusunda, panel eşbütünleşme ilişkilerinin varlığını test etmek amacıyla Durbin-Hausman panel eşbütünleşme testi uygulanmıştır. Ayrıca, değişkenler arasındaki nedensellik ilişkisini ortaya koymak amacıyla Emirmahmutoğlu ve Köse (2011) tarafından geliştirilen panel nedensellik testi tercih edilmiştir. Sermaye yapısını temsilen kaldıraç oranı bağımlı değişken olarak belirlenmiş; işletme büyüklüğü, kârlılık, sabit varlıkların payı, likidite düzeyi ve efektif vergi oranı ise bağımsız değişkenler olarak ele alınmıştır. Analiz sonuçlarına göre, likidite düzeyi ve sabit varlıkların payı kaldıraç oranını negatif yönde etkilerken, işletme büyüklüğü kaldıraç üzerinde pozitif ve anlamlı bir etki göstermektedir. Kârlılık ve efektif vergi oranının ise sektörel bazda farklı etkiler yarattığı tespit edilmiştir. Emirmahmutoğlu ve Köse nedensellik testinden elde edilen bulgulara göre, kısa vadede kaldıraç oranı ile bağımsız değişkenler arasında çift yönlü nedensel ilişkiler saptanmıştır. Bu bulgular, finansal hiyerarşi teorisi, dengeleme teorisi ve temsilcilik maliyeti teorisi gibi klasik sermaye yapısı yaklaşımlarını desteklemektedir. Çalışma sonuçları, Türk imalat sanayisi özelinde işletme yöneticilerine ve politika yapıcılara sektörel farkları dikkate alan finansal stratejiler geliştirmeleri yönünde önemli ipuçları sunmaktadır.

Objectives In patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), severe exacerbations (ECOPDs) impose significant morbidity and mortality. Current guidelines emphasise using ECOPD history to inform preventive treatments but offer limited guidance for risk stratification for the first severe ECOPD. Methods We developed and validated PRECISE-X using a cohort of newly diagnosed COPD patients from the UK’s Clinical Practice Research Datalink (2004–2022), to predict first severe ECOPD over 5 years (primary outcome) and 12 months (secondary outcome). Predictors were selected via clinical expertise and data-driven methods. Internal-external cross-validation was performed across practice regions to evaluate the model’s out-of-sample performance in terms of discrimination (c-statistic), calibration and net benefit. Results The study included 2 19 015 patients (mean age 66.0; 42.4% female). Observed risk of first severe ECOPD was 29.5% at 5 years (4.2% at 1 year). The final model included four mandatory predictors (sex, age, Medical Research Council dyspnoea score and forced expiratory volume in 1 second) and 28 optional predictors. In internal-external cross-validation, the average out-of-sample c-statistic was 0.836 (95% CI 0.827 to 0.846) for 5-year prediction and 0.756 (95% CI 0.746 to 0.766) for 1-year prediction. Calibration across regions was robust, and the model showed positive NB across a wide range of risk thresholds. In a secondary validation assessment among those with available spirometry data with confirmed airflow obstruction, the model was well calibrated and had only a modest decline in discriminatory performance. Conclusions PRECISE-X accurately predicts the first severe COPD exacerbation using routine clinical data, supporting earlier risk stratification and proactive disease management.

[This corrects the article DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2024.1331628.].

Pendahuluan. Stunting adalah gangguan pertumbuhan balita yang menyebabkan pertumbuhan anak yang lebih lambat dari normal dan memiliki efek jangka pendek dan jangka panjang. Salah satu upaya pemerintah dalam menangani kasus stunting adalah dengan peningkatan dan perbaikan status gizi. Pengukuran status gizi balita diperlukan untuk mendeteksi stunting pada balita. Ini dapat dilakukan dengan mengukur Indeks Masa Tubuh balita dan lingkar lengan atasnya, yang kemudian menghasilkan klasifikasi status gizi. Tujuan. Tujuan penelitian ini adalah untuk mengetahui status gizi balita berdasarkan ukuran lingkar lengan atas dan Indeks Masa Tubuh. Metode. Jenis penelitian yang digunakan adalah penelitian deskriptif kuantitatif dengan pendekatan cross sectional. Penelitian ini dilaksanakan di PAUD Al Hasanah Kabupaten Magetan pada tanggal 7 Januari 2025 dengan sampel penelitian berjumlah 20 anak. Dalam melaksanakan penelitian ini menggunakan instrument penelitian berupa pita lingkar lengan atas, grafik indeks masa tubuh terhadap usia, serta wawancara sebagai instrument pelengkap. Hasil. Hasil penelitian menunjukkan bahwa sebagian besar anak yaitu 18 anak (80%) memiliki status gizi yang baik dan 2 anak (20%) lainnya memiliki status gizi kurang. Dari hasil wawancara didapatkan bahwa anak yang memiliki status gizi yang baik mempunyai pola makan yang baik juga serta pola asuh dan social ekonomi yang baik sehingga menunjang pemberian gizi seimbang pada anak, begitu sebaliknya dengan anak gizi kurang. Orang tua perlu mendapatkan sosialisasi terkait dengan kondisi status gizi anak sehingga bisa memantau serta mencegah terjadinya stunting pada anak.

Background: Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is a common DNA virus linked to several human cancers, including breast cancer (BC). Specific EBV oncogenes, like EBNA1, are also implicated in the process of oncogenesis. This study aimed to investigate the prevalence of different EBV genotypes and EBNA1 oncogene variants in BC patients in Peshawar, Pakistan. Methodology: This study was conducted in the Institute of zoological sciences, University of Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. Tumor biopsies and demographic data were collected from 75 BC patients. DNA was extracted from the samples and EBV genotypes were detected using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) with specific primers. The EBNA1 oncogene was also amplified via PCR and sequenced using Sanger's sequencing method. The resulting sequences were analyzed to determine EBNA1 variants. All data were analyzed using descriptive statistics, primarily percentages and chi square test where applicable. Results: EBV was detected in 40% of the study participants. All positive samples were identified as EBV genotype-1. The most prevalent EBNA1 type found in these patients was the prototype P-Threonine. The study population was predominantly post-menopausal (63%), with most tumors being malignant (93%) and of grade II (69%). Among the malignant cases, 63% were hormone receptor (HR) positive, 11% were HER2-positive, and 26% were triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC). Conclusion: EBV type-1 and EBNA1 P-Threonine are present in breast cancer patients in Peshawar, Pakistan. This study provides valuable insight into the molecular characteristics of EBV in breast cancer within this specific population

Aim: This study aimed to assess the levels of future-related anxiety and the motivations for specialization among 4th and 5th year dental students at Fırat University Faculty of Dentistry. Material and Methods: A cross-sectional survey was administered to 143 dental students using a 20-item structured questionnaire. The survey included items addressing demographics, perceived adequacy of dental education, concerns about post-graduation employment, and intentions regarding the Dental Specialty Examination (DSE). Data were analyzed using IBM SPSS Statistics 23.0, with chi-square tests employed for categorical comparisons (p &lt; 0.05). Results: A majority of students (66.4%) expressed concern about securing employment after graduation, and 57.3% found their undergraduate education insufficient. Furthermore, 74.1% reported feeling unprepared for the DSE. Despite these concerns, 76.2% intended to take the exam, driven mainly by professional development (35%) and financial incentives (27.3%). Conclusion: The results indicate substantial levels of future-related anxiety among dental students, primarily stemming from perceived inadequacies in clinical training and uncertainty about career prospects. These findings highlight the need to strengthen dental education and provide academic and psychosocial support to better prepare students for professional challenges.

Intermittent Fasting is a nonpharmacological approach that can be applied in patients with Diabetes Mellitus to support blood glucose control; however, its implementation requires an adequate level of understanding and strong self-motivation. This study aimed to analyze the relationship between the level of understanding of Intermittent Fasting and self-motivation toward the risk of increased blood glucose in patients with Diabetes Mellitus. A quantitative approach with a correlational cross-sectional design was employed, involving 66 respondents. Data were analyzed using the Spearman rank correlation test. The results demonstrated a significant relationship between the level of understanding of Intermittent Fasting and self-motivation (r = 0.375; p = 0.002), indicating a positive direction with a weak correlation strength. These findings suggest that a better level of understanding of Intermittent Fasting tends to be associated with higher self-motivation in the context of controlling the risk of increased blood glucose. Structured education regarding Intermittent Fasting may therefore be considered as a strategy to support motivation and healthy lifestyle behaviors among patients with Diabetes Mellitus.

Background: Visual impairment is linked to a broad spectrum of health conditions. Nevertheless, there is an absence of large cohort studies investigating cancer risk in the visually impaired compared to seeing controls. The aim of this study was to investigate whether visually impaired adults have an increased risk for various types of cancer, compared to seeing controls. Methods: This was a retrospective cohort study comparing visually impaired adults aged 40 and over and 1:5 matched controls (by sex, birth year, and county of residence), between 2002 and 2018. Data were extracted from the Swedish National patient Registry, Statistics Sweden and from the Swedish Cause of Death Registry. A total of 48,493 adult Swedish men (44%) and women (56%), with a median age of 77 years (IQR: 64–86), with various degrees of visual impairment, from mild to total blindness, and 242,465 matched controls were followed up for a median of 5.1 (IQR 2.9–8.6) and 6.0 (IQR 3.6–9.8) years, respectively. The main outcomes included overall cancer incidence and incidence of different types of cancer. Results: Data analysis showed that visually impaired adults had an 18% significantly increased risk of any cancer (HR 1.18, 95% CI 1.16–1.20) when compared to seeing controls. The risk was also significantly increased for most cancers, with HRs ranging from 2.59 (95% CI 2.21–3.03) for brain cancer to 1.19 (95% CI 1.11–1.27) for breast cancer. No interaction was observed between cancer of any type and sex (p = 0.47). An elevated risk for all cancers in the visually impaired was observed across all age-groups: HR of 1.37 (95% CI 1.30–1.43) for ages 40–64, HR 1.17 (95% CI 1.13–1.20) for ages 65–79, and HR 1.11 (95% CI 1.08–1.15) for ages over 80. The risk of death was 60% higher among the cases compared to controls (HR 1.60, 95% CI 1.58–1.63). Conclusions: In this retrospective study of older adults, visual impairment was associated with increased cancer risk both overall and for specific types of cancer, in both sexes and across different age divisions of the cohort. These findings indicate the need for adjustments in health care polices in order to ensure equity in medical services.

Background: Pneumonia has consistently remained one of the leading causes of mortality among children under five, spanning the periods before, during and in the transition periods of the COVID-19 pandemic. Objectives: This study investigated the spatial association between healthcare, socioeconomic, environmental factors and the pneumonia incidence rate per 10,000 populations in children under five at the provincial level, comparing 2019 (before COVID-19 pandemic), 2021 (during COVID-19 pandemic) and 2023 (transition period of the COVID-19 pandemic) in Indonesia. Methods: This study utilized secondary data from the Annual Indonesian Health Profile Books (2019, 2021 and 2023), Statistical Yearbook of Indonesia (2020, 2022 and 2024), Central Statistical Agency’s website and Google Earth Engine. This spatial analysis applied global and local Moran’s I and advanced spatial regression techniques. Results: The incidence rate of pneumonia in children under five before, during and in the transition period of COVID-19 were 158.10, 80.82 and 129.39 per 10,000 population. Meanwhile, Moran's I values were -0.130, -0.103 and 0.087, respectively indicating a shift from dispersed to clustered spatial autocorrelation, particularly in Java Island. Negative correlations were observed between pneumonia incidence and the number of midwives (across all periods), access to proper sanitation facilities (latrines) (during the COVID-19 pandemic), and precipitation (during the transition period of the COVID-19 pandemic). In contrast, sulphur dioxide levels exhibited a positive spatial autocorrelation both before and during the COVID-19 pandemic. Conclusion: To reduce pneumonia in children under five in Indonesia, efforts should focus on strengthening midwife availability, access and expanding midwife training programs. Additionally, improving access to sanitation facilities and implementing air quality control measures will also play a key role in reducing pneumonia incidence.

Background Adequate nutrition for preschool-aged children is critical for proper growth and development. Preschoolers who attend the nursery spend a third of their day in the nursery and eat at least half of their meals each day there. Therefore, it is necessary to evaluate the nutrient composition of preschoolers’ lunchboxes. Objective This study was conducted to assess the energy and nutrient content of lunchboxes brought by preschoolers aged 2–4 years and to relate this to their nutritional status. Methods A cross-sectional study of preschoolers (aged 2–4 years) was conducted. The contents of the preschoolers’ lunchboxes were gathered via a 3-day weighed food record. Preschoolers’ anthropometric measures were taken. Results Preschoolers’ lunchboxes had an average energy content of 800.08 (285.40) kcal for the 2–3-year-old group and 848.37 (321.88 kcal for the 4-year-old group. They were all within the acceptable macronutrient distribution range (AMDR) and were composed of 62% carbohydrates, 12% protein, and 27% fat. Vitamins A, D, E, and K, which are fat-soluble, were present at lower levels than the RDA. Among the water-soluble vitamins that were examined in this study, vitamin C was above the RDA, whereas vitamin B12 was below it. While iron was above the RDA, zinc and calcium were below it. The preschoolers who participated had a triple burden of malnutrition: 27% were at risk of becoming overweight, 20% were overweight, 9% were obese, and 6% were stunted. Conclusions The findings concerning the micronutrient composition of lunchboxes reveal a nutritional imbalance that appears to have an immediate and long-term impact on preschoolers’ nutritional and health conditions.

Przestrzeń działania medyków należy bez wątpienia do najbardziej wymagających nie tylko pod względem organizacji i finansowania, ale również komunikacji oraz, niestety, zapewnienia bezpieczeństwa wszystkim obecnym w niej uczestnikom – zarówno pacjentom i ich rodzinom, jak i personelowi medycznemu. Wymaga to bez wątpienia znalezienia i aktualizowania systemowych rozwiązań. Przepisy obowiązującej Konstytucji stanowią w tym względzie istotne, lecz zarazem skąpe tło normatywne i to przede wszystkim na ustawodawcy zwykłym spoczywa obowiązek znalezienia normatywnej odpowiedzi na problem uzdrowienia relacji w służbie zdrowia. Celem niniejszego opracowania jest identyfikacja kluczowych aspektów prawnych omawianego zagadnienia w kontekście ram ustrojowych oraz wskazanie na możliwe kierunki, możliwości oraz ograniczenia w zakresie kształtowania relacji pomiędzy pracownikami służby zdrowia a pacjentami.

Pulmonary arterio-venous malformations (PAVMs) are abnormal vascular connections between pulmonary arteries and pulmonary veins, preventing exposure of blood to normal pulmonary capillaries, leading to shunting. We report a successfully managed case of PAVM wherein the patient presented with exertional desaturation. A 23-year-old male with no known co-morbidities presented to out-patient department with complaints of exertional breathlessness for one month. His vitals were stable but had oxygen desaturation from 98% at rest to 90% on exertion. Chest radiography demonstrated an oval homogenous opacity in the right upper zone with smooth margins. Computed Tomography Pulmonary Angiography (CTPA) demonstrated solitary PAVM located at superior segment of right lower lobe. He was successfully managed with embolization of the lesion, leading to resolution of symptoms and exertional desaturation.

Objective: To evaluate whether a family‑centred education and training programmed improves diabetes knowledge and quality of life in patients with type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (DM) in Tasikmalaya, Indonesia. Methods: A quasi‑experimental community intervention was conducted at the Kahuripan primary health centre on 15 August 2025. Forty adults with type 2 DM and their family members participated. The programme comprised interactive lectures on diabetes and quality of life, practical training in self‑monitoring of blood glucose, foot care, healthy menu planning and stress management, and provision of a culturally adapted booklet (“Family Alert to Diabetes”). Knowledge was measured using a pre‑validated questionnaire before and after the intervention, while clinical data (age, blood pressure, fasting and post‑prandial glucose) and quality‑of‑life scores were recorded. Data were analysed descriptively; Shapiro‑Wilk tests assessed normality and a Wilcoxon signed‑rank test compared pre‑ and post‑test knowledge. Results: Participants were predominantly older adults (mean age 62.7 years). Baseline mean systolic/diastolic blood pressure was 143/80 mmHg and fasting blood glucose was 149 mg dL⁻¹. Quality‑of‑life scores were low, particularly in the physical domain (mean 51.36%). Mean knowledge scores improved from 78.5 (pre‑test) to 81.8 (post‑test); however, the difference did not reach statistical significance (Wilcoxon W=186.5, p=0.055). Participants with lower baseline scores showed the greatest improvement. Families reported increased confidence in supporting dietary adherence, physical activity and foot care. Conclusion: A short, family‑centred education and training programme enhanced diabetes knowledge and self‑care skills, although improvement was modest and not statistically significant. Longer follow‑up and integration of psychosocial support may be required to produce sustained, clinically meaningful gains in quality of life.

Wearable sensing offers a promising path for continuous monitoring and early intervention of freezing of gait (FOG) in Parkin- sons disease (PD), yet heterogeneity in sensor type/placement, ground- truthing, and validation metrics hampers comparability and transla- tion. This scoping review (1) catalogs sensor types and placements;(2) compares performance across sensor modalities and placements under comparable measurement regimes (with emphasis on accuracy) and analyzes how metric definitions shape results; and (3) identifies gaps for real-world deployment and standardization. We searched PubMed, Embase, IEEE Xplore, and Web of Science (2015June 2025). Inclusion required a wearable approach targeting FOG/abnormal gait, at least one evaluation metric, and PD participants/data; two reviewers screened/extracted independently with third-party adju- dication. Across the studies summarized in Tables 13, wearable sensing for Parkinsons disease (PD) freezing of gait (FOG) remains dominated by inertial measurement units (IMUs) with a variety of body placements (waist/lower-back, shank/ankle, foot, and multi-node configurations). According to the table, best accuracies locate roughly 71% to 99%, reflecting both differences in task definition (FOG detection, or broader gait abnormality) and heterogeneity in ground- truthing and validation protocols. A consistent pattern emerges: placement matters, and how we validate models strongly shapes apparent performance. We conclude FOG wearables are IMU-centric and placement-sensitive; standardizing labels/metrics and prioritizing subject-independent, home validationalongside sparse, placement- optimized designs, &gt;24-h runtime, on-device inference, privacy, and adherence/burden reportingare key to translation.

Estrogen receptor α (ERα) is a key therapeutic target in ER-positive breast cancer. Structurally, ERα contains activation function (AF) domains that drives breast cancer proliferation, metastasis, and drug resistance through classical genomic, non-genomic, and ligand-independent signaling pathways. Clinically approved and investigational drugs targeting Erα include selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs), selective estrogen receptor downregulators/degraders (SERDs), and novel strategies such as proteolysis-targeting chimeras (PROTACs). Current research focuses on overcoming endocrine resistance via combination therapies targeting mutations in ESR1, the gene encoding ERα, non-genomic signaling pathways, and the tumor microenvironment, which may advance precision medicine in breast cancer. This article summarizes recent advances in ERα-targeting inhibitors and their therapeutic implications, to provide potential precision therapeutic strategies for breast cancer patients with ER positive.

The results suggest that heavy dependence on e-cigarettes negatively alters sleep quality. These adverse sleep alterations are exacerbated by sedentary behavior. Programs are needed to reduce e-cigarette use and sedentary behavior to enhance sleep quality.

ABSTRACT Ketamine has emerged as a highly effective intervention for treatment‐resistant depression (TRD). Though it acts as a non‐competitive antagonist of excitatory N‐methyl‐D‐aspartate receptors (NMDAR), widely expressed in the brain, including on inhibitory γ‐aminobutyric acid (GABA)‐ergic cells, the mechanisms of its antidepressant action are less clear. To investigate the links between glutamate and GABA neurotransmission and the clinical benefits of ketamine, we used proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy ( 1 H‐MRS) to measure both glutamate and GABA levels in the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC) in 60 participants with TRD before (~within 1 week), and 24 h after a 40‐min intravenous infusion with 0.5 mg/kg of racemic ( R,S )‐ketamine. The 17‐item Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HDRS 17 ) was used as the primary measure of clinical improvement, and a 50% or greater improvement in HDRS 17 ratings was used to define treatment responders. Ketamine increased mean dACC glutamate levels in responders only 24 h after treatment ( n = 25, p = 0.01). Further, lower glutamate levels at baseline predicted greater improvements in HDRS 17 scores at 24 h post treatment ( p &lt; 0.0001). However, GABA levels remained stable after treatment irrespective of response status ( p = 0.90). Metabolites associated with neuronal integrity (tNAA), metabolic function (tCr), and membrane turnover (tCho), which may serve as complementary biological evidence of ketamine‐induced plasticity, also increased with treatment (all p &lt; 0.01). Results provide evidence of sustained enhancements of neurotransmission or other glutamate‐related metabolic effects following subanesthetic ketamine in responders and a potential role of ACC glutamate levels as a biomarker of responsivity to ketamine.

Oligohydramnios, characterized by reduced amniotic fluid volume, poses significant risks to fetal growth and pregnancy outcomes. Objectives: To compare the effects of oral versus intravenous fluid therapy on AFI in women with oligohydramnios, and to determine the more effective hydration strategy for clinical use. Methods: Following ethical approval from the Institutional Review Board of Fatima Jinnah Medical University, a quasi-experimental study was conducted. 60 patients diagnosed with oligohydramnios based on operational criteria were enrolled after obtaining written informed consent. Participants were randomly divided into two groups: Group A received IV hydration, while Group B received oral hydration. Both groups remained admitted for one week, during which AFI was measured at baseline and after the intervention. Results: The mean age of participants was 27.67 ± 6.00 years. Baseline AFI was 3.79 ± 0.25 cm, with no significant differences between groups. After one week, Group A (IV hydration) showed a mean AFI of 5.34 ± 0.23 cm, while Group B (oral hydration) achieved a significantly higher mean AFI of 5.69 ± 0.41 cm (p=0.000). Treatment efficacy was reported in 90.0% of Group A and 96.7% of Group B participants (p=0.612). Conclusions: The improvement in AFI with oral hydration was slightly better than with IV hydration, but not statistically significant. The two interventions were safe with no maternal or fetal adverse effects. The first option is oral hydration, which is practical, non-invasive, and cost-effective, especially in resource-restricted settings.

In high-altitude regions, the presence of PCI should be considered when MSCT reveals pneumoperitoneum. In cases of pneumoperitoneum caused by PCI, which does not typically require urgent surgery, MSCT clearly delineates the site and extent of lesion involvement, as well as any intestinal and extra-intestinal complications.

&lt;p&gt;Patient demographics and disease characteristics at baseline (safety population).&lt;/p&gt;

Bu çalışma, Türkiye, İsveç, Hollanda, Norveç ve Almanya’daki yaşlı bakım sistemlerini finansman, hizmet türü, erişilebilirlik ve kurumsal yapı kriterleri temelinde karşılaştırmalı olarak analiz etmektedir. Küresel düzeyde yaşlanan nüfus, ülkeleri daha sürdürülebilir, erişilebilir ve etkin yaşlı bakım politikaları geliştirmeye zorlamaktadır. İncelenen ülkeler arasında İsveç ve Norveç, vergi tabanlı ve yerel yönetim merkezli modelleriyle dikkat çekerken; Almanya ve Hollanda, sigorta temelli uzun süreli bakım sistemleri ile yaşlı bireylere kapsamlı hizmetler sunmaktadır. Türkiye ise ağırlıklı olarak aile temelli bakım modeli ile hizmet vermekte; profesyonel hizmet kapasitesi ve kurumsal altyapı açısından sınırlılıklar göstermektedir. Çalışmada, Türkiye için uygulanabilir bir yaşlı bakım modeli önerilmiştir. Bu öneri, İsveç’in evde bakım ve yerel yönetim temelli yapısını; Hollanda’nın bireyselleştirilmiş ve toplum merkezli hizmet anlayışını temel almakta; aynı zamanda Türkiye’nin kırsal-kentsel farklılıkları, personel eksikliği ve geleneksel aile yapısı gibi özgün koşullarını dikkate almaktadır. Ayrıca sürdürülebilir bir finansman modeli için uzun süreli bakım sigortası sistemi önerilmektedir. Sonuç olarak, Türkiye'nin yaşlı bakım sisteminin dönüşümü, sadece hizmet altyapısının değil, aynı zamanda finansal mekanizmaların, mesleki standartların ve yönetişim yapısının yeniden yapılandırılmasını gerektirmektedir.

Background and Objectives: Interventions targeting the gut–brain axis offer potential for mitigating Subjective Cognitive Decline (SCD), a critical window for Alzheimer’s prevention. This study evaluated the effects of a novel probiotic supplement, ExoBDNF, on cognitive function, sleep, and emotional distress in adults with SCD. Materials and Methods: In this 9-week open-label study, participants received ExoBDNF supplementation. Efficacy was assessed using the SCD-Questionnaire (SCD-Q), DASS-21, PSQI, MoCA, and a computerized cognitive battery measuring inhibition (Go/No-Go), flexibility (Task Switching), and working memory. Results: Post-intervention analyses revealed significant improvements in subjective cognition (SCD-Q, p &lt; 0.001), sleep quality (PSQI, p &lt; 0.001), and emotional distress (DASS-21, p &lt; 0.001). Objective cognitive performance also improved, with significant gains in MoCA scores (p = 0.047) and executive function metrics. Spearman correlation analysis indicated a significant link between cognitive and emotional changes: longitudinal reductions in SCD scores correlated with concurrent reductions in emotional distress (rho = 0.471, p = 0.009). Furthermore, higher baseline SCD scores predicted greater improvement in emotional outcomes (rho = −0.540, p = 0.002). Conclusions: ExoBDNF supplementation significantly enhanced cognitive performance, sleep quality, and emotional well-being. The findings demonstrate that improvements in subjective cognition are closely tied to alleviated emotional distress, supporting the gut–brain axis as a viable therapeutic target for early-stage cognitive decline.

Both seizures and epileptiform discharges have been reported in various amyloid plaque- forming mouse models of Alzheimer's disease (AD). These mice also show premature mortality possibly related to epileptic seizures. Yet, the relationship between epileptic manifestations and amyloid pathology remains elusive. We utilized deltaFosB as a marker for sustained neuronal hyperactivity to localize the epileptic focus and compared it with age and sex differences in premature mortality between APP/PS1, 5xFAD and wildtype littermate mice and epileptiform discharges (EDs) during sleep in cortex and hippocampus. APP/PS1 mice showed elevated FosB/deltaFosB (shortly FosB) staining in the dentate granule (DG) cells and CA1-CA3 pyramidal cells. These were also the origins of identified epileptiform discharges (EDs) in LFP recordings. APP/PS1 mice showed much higher premature mortality than 5xFAD mice, females more than males. FosB staining intensity in APP/PS1 mice was robustly elevated compared to wildtype mice and peaked at 3 months of age. In contrast, FosB intensity in 5xFAD was lower than in wildtype mice at 1 and 3 months of age, showing a modest elevation at 10 months. In APP/PS1 mice between 1.5 and 3 months of age, the DG amyloid load correlated positively with FosB intensity. Furthermore, the DG FosB intensity showed a positive correlation with the frequency of EDs during sleep. These findings suggest that FosB staining intensity can be used as a proxy for local epileptiform activity in AD model mice and help unveil cellular and molecular basis of AD related neuronal hyperactivity and epilepsy.

The number of students living with disabilities entering post-secondary education, including health professional programs (HPPs), is increasing. However, disabled students continue to experience challenges in both the on-campus and fieldwork components of these programs. The purpose of this study is to understand the experiences and perspectives of fieldwork educators to determine how they can be supported by HPPs when supervising students living with disabilities. An online survey was developed and circulated to fieldwork educators who supervise students in nine HPPs at McMaster University in Canada. Descriptive statistics and content analysis were used to analyze survey responses. The survey was completed by 42 respondents, 10 of whom reported living with a disability and demonstrated a nuanced understanding of accommodation issues. More than half of the total respondents reported they had supervised disabled students in fieldwork; however, only 12 received accommodation plans and evaluation occurred informally, if at all. Respondents requested training on how to accommodate specific student needs. Efficient processes are needed for educator training, and the involvement of educators is needed in accommodation development. Accommodations must be evaluated to ensure students have equitable opportunities for learning and assessment. Educators living with disabilities provide valuable insights on dismantling systemic barriers to inclusion.

Bu çalışmada enginar yetiştiriciliğinde sorun olan yabancı otlara karşı herbisitlerin (aclonifen (çıkış öncesi) ve pendimethalin (dikim öncesi ve çıkış öncesi)), siyah polietilen örtü ile malçlamanın ve iki kez el çapasının yabancı otlara ve enginara etkileri değerlendirilmiştir. Uygulamalardan 40-50 gün sonra yabancı otların kaplama alanı açısından yapılan değerlendirmelerde ilk yıl el çapası (%93.3) ve siyah polietilen örtü ile malçlama (%95.1) uygulamaları en etkili bulunurken, ikinci yıl aclonifen uygulaması (%90) daha etkili olmuştur. Ancak hasat dönemi değerlendirmelerinde her iki yılda da sadece siyah polietilen örtü ile malçlama uygulamasının (%47.3-100) yabancı otların kuru ağırlıkları üzerindeki etkisi görülmüştür. Enginar verim parametreleri açısından da en etkili uygulama ortalama %228 verim artışı ile siyah polietilen örtü ile malçlama olarak tespit edilmiştir. Çalışmada kullanılan çıkış öncesi aclonifen ve pendimethalinin enginarda fitotoksisite yaratmadığı, ancak etkisinin enginar üretim sezonu sonuna kadar yeterli olmadığı ve bu nedenle diğer mücadele yöntemleriyle desteklenmesi gerektiği belirlenmiştir. Enginar alanlarında yabancı otlarla mücadelede iki kez çapalama uygulaması da yeterli bulunmamış, siyah polietilen örtü ile malçlama uygulamasının ise hem yabancı otlarla mücadele hem de verim parametreleri açısından en etkili uygulama olması nedeniyle yaygınlaştırılması gerektiği kanaatine varılmıştır.

İstiklal Mahkemeleri kuruluşu, yargılama usulleri, yetkileri ve verdiği kararlar açısından yakın tarihimizin en dikkat çeken kurumlarından biri olmuştur. Hıyanet-i Vataniye Kanunu ve Asker Firarileri Hakkında Kanun ile faaliyete geçen bu mahkemelerin ilk çalışma devresi 1920-1923 yılları arasını kapsamaktadır. Bu devrede faaliyet gösteren ve Birinci Dönem İstiklal Mahkemeleri olarak adlandırılan mahkemelerin öncelikli amacı askerî firarları engellemektir. Mahkemeler Millî Mücadele’nin en çetin yıllarında hem ordu disiplinini sağlamak hem de uzun süren savaşların yarattığı toplumsal kargaşayı ve otorite boşluğunu gidermek adına önemli bir görev üstlenmiştir. Takrir-i Sükûn Kanunu ile başlayan ikinci devre ise 1923-1926 yıllarını kapsamaktadır. Bu dönemde İstiklal Mahkemeleri’nin amacı ve mahiyeti değişmiş, bir yandan olağanüstü hâl koşulları altında inkılaplar yapılmaya çalışılırken diğer yandan birçok suç başlığı İstiklal Mahkemelerinin yetki alanına dâhil edilmiştir. Casusluk suçları da bu dönemin önemli yargılama konularından birisidir. İstiklal Mahkemeleri’nde 1923-26 yılları arasında casusluk fiilini işlediğine hükmedilen birçok şahıs mahkûm edilerek çeşitli cezalara çarptırılmıştır. Çalışmanın konusu İkinci Dönem Ankara İstiklal Mahkemesi’nde yargılanan ve diğer casusluk şüphelilerinden çok farklı bir portreye sahip olan Madam Lida Lagaze’nin muhakemesidir. Bolşevik casusluğu ithamı ile yargılanan Madam Lida Lagaze davası TBMM Arşivi İstiklal Mahkemesi Fonu’ndan elde edilen ve bugüne kadar hiçbir yerde yayımlanmamış olan belgeler ışığında ele alınmıştır.

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a common hormonal disorder of reproductive-aged women all over the world. Low- and middle-income countries, such as Bangladesh, often give inadequate attention to mental health issues. As a result, a growing number of women with PCOS are dealing with mental health issues, including an under diagnosis and under-treatment of psychological illnesses. The study assesses the prevalence and psychological impacts of PCOS among women in the reproductive age as well as compared the mental health inequalities between rural and urban women in Bangladesh. A sample of 212 women in the reproductive age was collected using a convenience sampling procedure. Additionally, for diagnosis of PCOS, the Rotterdam criteria were used. Depression, anxiety, stress, and insomnia were measured using DASS-21 and ISI-7 tool. To analyze the association and impact of PCOS on mental health problems, a chi-square test and multivariate binary logistic regression were conducted. The Mann-Whitney U test was implemented to assess mental health disparities among rural-urban reproductive women. Among the participants, the PCOS prevalence was 50.9%, and the rates of depression, anxiety, stress, and insomnia were 51.4%, 62.3%, 46.7%, and 53.3%, respectively. Based on the Rotterdam criteria, women with PCOS had a significantly greater prevalence of psychological disorders than women without PCOS. Women residing in rural region were more prone to meet Rotterdam criteria and had higher anxiety and insomnia syndrome. Women who met two or three diagnostic criteria had a higher chance of experiencing psychological distress than others. Furthermore, relationship status and BMI are useful predictive factors of mental health consequences. The findings showed a substantial prevalence of emotional distress among PCOS women in Bangladesh. Additionally, a comprehensive mental health investigation is suggested for PCOS. Addressing both the physical and psychological aspects of PCOS is essential to develop women’s overall well-being and quality of life.

<title>Abstract</title> <italic> <bold>Background:</bold> </italic> <italic/> Childhood obesity poses a global health concern with implications for long-term health and well-being. In Saudi Arabia, the increasing prevalence of overweight and obesity among children and adolescents requires urgent action to understand the contributing factors affecting lifestyle and dietary choices. This study addresses the nutritional challenges faced by school children in AlMadinah AlMunawarah, Saudi Arabia. <italic> <bold>Methods</bold> </italic> <bold>:</bold> A cross-sectional stratified study was conducted involving 6000 healthy school children aged 5-18 years, selected through random sampling from 20 schools. Anthropometric measurements, dietary intake, and physical activity data were collected using validated questionnaires and analyzed using SPSS. Descriptive statistics and inferential analysis were used to present the major findings of the study. <italic> <bold>Results:</bold> </italic> <italic/> A total of 3987 students responded with a response rate of 67%, including 56% boys and 44% girls. The mean BMI was 20.7 ± 5.84 kg/m². The prevalence of obesity and overweight was 14.7% and 15.4%, respectively, while 19% were underweight. Obesity was more prevalent among boys (16%) than girls (14%). Approximately 88% of participants consumed fried foods regularly, while 61% consumed soft drinks daily. Only 37% of boys and 32% of girls reported daily milk intake. Physical inactivity was common, with 44% of students reporting no daily activity and 77% reporting screen use during meals. <italic> <bold>Conclusions:</bold> </italic> Unhealthy dietary practices, high consumption of energy-dense foods, and sedentary lifestyles contribute to the nutritional imbalance among school children in AlMadinah AlMunawarah, Saudi Arabia. Early school-based nutritional interventions and public health policies are crucial to reduce the burden of childhood obesity and promote healthier dietary and physical activity habits.

Abstract This paper is the first of two publications comprising a 2025 update to the 2014 Consensus Statement on treatment and return-to-play guidelines on the Female Athlete Triad (Triad), defined as three inter-related components including energy status, reproductive function, and bone health. The Triad is initiated by exposure to varying degrees of energy deficiency with or without disordered eating/eating disorders with primary pathological outcomes to the reproductive and skeletal systems. This first paper includes a detailed update on the scientific underpinnings of the Triad and introduces a new Triad model specific to the adolescent female athlete. Energy deficiency and “metabolic compensation” are added to the energy status continuum to describe adaptations that reflect energy conservation. Ovarian steroid hormone exposure and functional hypothalamic oligo-amenorrhea are added to the reproductive function continuum. Bone stress injury is added to the bone health continuum. Rates of change are depicted for the induction and recovery of clinical outcomes within the adult model. Evidence-based statements are presented throughout the paper and supported by a high number of level A and B grades.

Purpose: Revision lumbar surgery following posterior decompression is technically challenging because epidural adhesions and altered anatomy increase the risk of complications during posterior re-entry. Surgical approaches that avoid the previously operated corridor may reduce these risks. Biportal endoscopic lumbar interbody fusion using an extraforaminal approach allows direct neural decompression and interbody fusion through a new surgical corridor, which may be advantageous in revision settings. However, clinical evidence regarding this technique in revision surgery remains limited. To evaluate the clinical and radiological outcomes of biportal endoscopic revision extraforaminal lumbar interbody fusion (BE-REFLIF) performed at lumbar segments previously treated with central decompression.Materials and Methods: This study is Single-center retrospective case series.We retrospectively reviewed 20 consecutive patients who underwent single-level BE-REFLIF as revision surgery after prior central decompression between September 2017 and June 2024. Clinical outcomes were assessed using the visual analogue scale (VAS) for back and leg pain, the Oswestry Disability Index (ODI), and the EuroQol-5D (EQ-5D). Radiological outcomes included disc height, segmental alignment, lumbar lordosis, fusion status, and cage subsidence. Perioperative data and postoperative complications were also analyzed.Results: Significant improvements were observed in all clinical outcome measures during follow-up. Mean VAS scores for back and leg pain and ODI decreased significantly over time (p &lt; 0.001). Radiological analysis demonstrated significant restoration of disc height, improvement in segmental alignment, and maintenance of lumbar lordosis. Solid fusion was achieved in 85% of patients at the final follow-up, and cage subsidence occurred in 25% of cases without the need for reoperation. Perioperative complications included dural tears in 10% of patients, epidural hematoma in 5%, and surgical site infection in 5%, with no instrumentation-related failures.Conclusions: Biportal endoscopic revision extraforaminal lumbar interbody fusion demonstrated favorable clinical and radiological outcomes in patients undergoing revision surgery after previous central decompression. By utilizing an extraforaminal corridor that avoids scarred posterior tissues, BE-REFLIF allows effective direct decompression and interbody fusion with an acceptable complication profile. This technique may represent a viable and less invasive option for selected patients requiring revision lumbar fusion.

Introduction: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic inflammatory joint disease which has a significant, negative influence of patients’ quality of daily life. In routine clinical practice there is a usage of classic biomarkers, such as rheumatoid factor (RF) and anti-citrullinated antibodies (anti-CCP), as well as C-reactive protein (CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) in detecting onset or exacerbation of the disease and in monitoring its course. Aim: The study presents other markers with higher sensitivity and specificity which will let doctors identify even smoldering systemic inflammation and introduce appropriate treatment to prevent serious consequences of RA, including joints’ erosion and disability. Methodology: This review was conducted using a systematic approach to identify and analyze relevant scientific literature on the potential biomarkers of RA activity and progression and to indicate their practical clinical implications. We searched PubMed and Google Scholar databases. Articles were searched using following words : “Rheumatoid arthritis”, “biomarkers”, “ inflammatory”, “progression”,” treatment”. Summary: In a group of promising markers there are: calprotectin (S100A8/S100A9), 14-3-3η, antibodies against carbamylated proteins (anti-CarP), metalloproteinase 3 (MMP-3), other MMPs and cytokines (IL-1, IL-6, TNF-α).

Background: Testicular dysgenesis syndrome (TDS) is a complex disorder of the male reproductive system related to disfunction of the fetal testis. The clinical features of TDS may be evident at birth or infancy (cryptorchidism, hypospadias and/or reduced anogenital distance) or occur later in adulthood (testis cancer, infertility). Genetic background seems to be important for genetic predisposition, with new genes being associated with components of the syndrome in last years. Interestingly, the incidence of clinical manifestations of TDS has been increasing in many countries in recent decades, suggesting that genetic predisposition alone cannot explain this trend. Consequently, the hypothesis of multifactorial etiopathogenesis is becoming increasingly accepted nowadays, with environmental factors probably acting during early developmental stages in genetically predisposed individuals. Methods: In this narrative review, we aim to critically evaluate genetic and non-genetic factors involved in the pathogenesis of TDs. Results: Important associations with intrauterine growth disorders and maternal diseases (overweight/obesity and diabetes) as well as lifestyle factors (e.g., smoking and alcohol abuse) were found. In such context, endocrine disruptors probably play a major role. These substances are widely used in industry and can exert estrogenic and antiandrogenic effects, potentially interfering with the development of the fetal gonad. Conclusions: Considering their possible impact on male sexual health, more attention should be focused on maternal modifiable factors to confirm with prospective studies the mixed results of available evidence.

Azerbaycan’ın Nisan 1920’de Bolşevikler tarafından ele geçirilmesiyle Azerbaycan Demokratik Cumhuriyeti’ne (ADC) son verildi. Bu tarihten itibaren Azerbaycan’da pek çok alanı kapsayan Sovyetleştirme politikalarını uygulamaya yönelik adımlar atıldı. İdari, askeri, yargı ve sosyo-ekonomik gibi farklı sahalarda önemli dönüşümler gerçekleşti. Özel mülkiyet kaldırıldı. Bir çok kurum kamulaştırıldı. Ulusal ordu tasfiye edildi. ADC döneminde varolan yargı kurumları ortadan kaldırılarak halk mahkemeleri kuruldu. Hatta bu mahkemelerde daha önce Azerbaycan’da iktidar olan yönetimlerin kanunlarına atıf yapılması dahi yasaklandı. Azerbaycan’ın pek çok yerinde Sovyet idari birimleri kuruldu. Dolayısıyla Azerbaycan’ın Sovyet hakimiyetine girmesiyle birlikte ülkede hızlı bir biçimde Sovyetleştirme politikaları uygulanmaya başlandı. Ancak bu politikaların hayata geçirilmesi halk üzerinde rahatsızlık yarattı. Çünkü Sovyetler tarafından alınan kararlarda ve hayata geçirilen uygulamalarda, toplumun yapısı dikkate alınmadı. Bununla birlikte Sovyet yönetiminin halka yönelik baskı uygulamaları ve Kızıl Ordu’nun sert ve keyfi davranışları da toplumun tepkisine yol açtı. Diğer yandan Sovyet yönetimi ve Ermenistan temsilcileri arasında Azerbaycan’daki bazı toprakların tartışmalı olduğuna dair fikir birliği içinde bulunmaları da halkta memnuniyetsizlik yarattı. Bütün bu gelişmeler, 1920’li yıllarda Azerbaycan’ın bir çok yerinde Sovyet karşıtı ayaklanmaların çıkmasına sebep oldu. Meydana gelen bazı ayaklanmalarda isyancılar, yer yer başarı sağlasa da Kızıl Ordu birlikleri isyanları sert bir biçimde bastırdı. Ayaklanmalar sırasında ve daha sonra Sovyet askeri birlikleri ve ceza organları tarafından binlerce kişi öldürüldü. Dolayısıyla Azerbaycan’da Sovyet hakimiyetinin başlamasıyla birlikte hayata geçirilen uygulamalar sonrasında meydana gelen ayaklanmaların sonucu Azerbaycan için adeta bir yıkım oldu. Çalışmada; Sovyet yönetiminin Azerbaycan’da hayata geçirdiği önemli uygulamalar incelenmiş olup Azerbaycan’ın Sovyetleştirilme süreci açıklanmaya çalışılmıştır. Bunun yanında Azerbaycan’da Sovyet hakimiyetinin tesis edilmeye başlanmasıyla toplumun duyduğu rahatsızlık ifade edilmiş ve Sovyet karşıtı ayaklanmaların çıkış sebepleri üzerinde durulmuştur. Bunlarla birlikte 1920’de Azerbaycan’ın farklı bölgelerinde meydana gelen Sovyet karşıtı bazı önemli ayaklanmalar anlatılarak sonuçlarına değinilmiştir.

Purpose: To compare target hyperopic refraction with achieved postoperative refractive outcomes in pediatric cataract surgery and to identify factors influencing absolute prediction error. Study Design: longitudinal cohort study. Place and Duration of Study: Mughal Eye Hospital, July 2024 to December 2024. Methods: This study included 26 eyes of children aged 1–6 years undergoing cataract surgery with intraocular lens implantation. Preoperative biometric parameters and target refraction were recorded, and postoperative achieved refraction was measured. Statistical analysis included paired t-test, Pearson correlation, and multiple linear regression to evaluate refractive prediction error (p &lt; 0.05). Results: The mean age of the patients was 3.69 ± 1.81 years. Mean axial length was 22.56 ± 1.78 mm, and mean IOL power was 23.33 ± 5.94 D. The mean achieved postoperative refraction was 4.47 ± 1.46 D compared to target refraction of 3.76 ± 1.11 D, resulting in a mean hyperopic prediction error of +0.71 D (95% CI: 0.55–0.86; p &lt; 0.001). Absolute prediction error was negatively correlated with age (r = −0.987, p = 0.001) and axial length (r = −0.956,p = 0.001), and positively correlated with keratometry (r = 0.986, p = 0.001) and IOL power (r = 0.982, p = 0.001). Conclusion: A consistent hyperopic overshoot relative to target refraction was observed after pediatric cataract surgery. Age and axial length were the most significant contributors to refractive prediction error, highlighting the need for individualized IOL calculations in younger children with shorter axial lengths.

การวิจัยนี้มีวัตถุประสงค์เพื่อ 1) สร้างและหาประสิทธิภาพของการใช้กิจกรรมการเรียนรู้ โดยใช้นิทานประกอบการเรียนภาษาไทย ที่ใช้ Generative AI ร่วมกับเทคนิคการจัดการเรียนรู้ 5W1H ตามเกณฑ์ประสิทธิภาพ 75/75 2) เปรียบเทียบความสามารถในการคิดวิเคราะห์ ก่อนเรียนและหลังเรียน โดยใช้กิจกรรมการนิทานประกอบการเรียนภาษาไทยที่ใช้ Generative AI ร่วมกับเทคนิคการจัดการเรียนรู้ 5W1H และหลังเรียนกับเกณฑ์ ร้อยละ 70 และ 3) ศึกษาความคิดเห็นของนักเรียนที่มีต่อการจัดกิจกรรมการเรียนรู้ โดยใช้นิทานประกอบการเรียนภาษาไทย ที่ใช้ Generative AI ร่วมกับ เทคนิคการจัดการเรียนรู้ 5W1H ตัวอย่างที่ใช้ในการวิจัยครั้งนี้ คือ นักเรียนชั้นประถมศึกษาปีที่ 5 โรงเรียนวัดเกาะน้อย จังหวัดสุโขทัย ซึ่งได้มาโดยการเลือกแบบเจาะจง เครื่องมือที่ใช้ในการวิจัย ประกอบด้วย แผนการจัดการเรียนรู้ แบบทดสอบความสามารถในการคิดวิเคราะห์ และแบบประเมินความพึงพอใจ สถิติที่ใช้ในการวิจัย ได้แก่ ค่าเฉลี่ย ส่วนเบี่ยงเบนมาตรฐาน และการทดสอบค่าทีของกลุ่มตัวอย่างที่ไม่เป็นอิสระจากกัน ผลการวิจัย พบว่า 1) ผลการสร้างและหาประสิทธิภาพของการใช้กิจกรรมการเรียนรู้ มีประสิทธิภาพ 81.64/81.23 พบว่า นักเรียนมีคะแนนหลังเรียนสูงกว่าก่อนเรียนอย่างมีนัยสำคัญทางสถิติที่ระดับ .05 คะแนนการทดสอบหลังเรียนเท่ากับ ( = 24.69, SD = 1.34) ซึ่งสูงกว่าเกณฑ์ อย่างมีนัยสำคัญทางสถิติที่ระดับ .05 นักเรียนมีความคิดเห็นต่อการจัดกิจกรรมการเรียนรู้ ในภาพรวมมีความคิดเห็นอยู่ในระดับ มากที่สุด ( = 4.60, SD = 0.48)

Bu çalışmada ilk olarak anonim şirket yönetim kurulu üyeliklerinde henüz bir açılma meydana gelmemişken olası açılmaları dolduracak olan üyelerin esas sözleşmeyle veya genel kurul kararıyla önceden belirlenip belirlenemeyeceği, diğer deyişle anonim şirketlerde yedek üyeliğin mümkün olup olmadığı sorunu incelenmiştir. Bu bağlamda yedek üyeliğin mümkün olduğu sonucuna varılması takdirde netleştirilmesi gereken hususlar, açık deyişle yedek üyelerin sayısı, taşımaları gereken nitelikler, seçilmeleri/atanmaları, görev süreleri, tescil ve ilânı, hakları ve yükümlülükleri ile tâbi oldukları yasaklar, görevlerinin sona ermesi, şirkete karşı hukuki sorumlulukları ile yedek üyelerin işlem ve fiillerinden dolayı şirketin üçüncü kişilere karşı sorumluluğu mercek altına alınmıştır. İkinci olarak anonim şirket yönetim kurulu üyelerinden herhangi birinin mazereti sebebiyle toplantıya katılamaması hâlinde, onun yerine, söz konusu toplantı ile sınırlı olarak görev yapacak bir üyenin (tamamlayıcı üyenin) belirlenmesine imkân tanınıp tanınamayacağı sorunu üzerinde durulmuştur. Üçüncü ve son olarak, tüzel kişi yönetim kurulu üyesini temsilen yönetim kurulunda bulunan gerçek kişinin yedeğinin veya tamamlayıcısının atanıp atanamayacağı ele alınmıştır.

Sanrısal parazitoz (SP), bireyin deri ya da mukozalarında parazit, böcek veya benzeri organizmaların bulunduğuna dair sarsılmaz inançla karakterize, nadir ancak klinik açıdan oldukça karmaşık bir psikotik bozukluktur. Hastalık genellikle yoğun kaşıntı, dokunsal halüsinasyonlar ve “kibrit kutusu işareti” olarak tanımlanan sahte kanıt sunumlarıyla ortaya çıkar. Hastaların dermatoloji ve enfeksiyon hastalıkları gibi branşlara tekrarlayan başvurularda bulunması, buna karşın psikiyatrik değerlendirmeyi reddetmesi tanıda gecikmeye ve sekonder cilt lezyonları, işlev kaybı ve sosyal izolasyon gibi ciddi sonuçlara yol açabilir. SP çoğunlukla ileri yaşta ve özellikle kadınlarda görülür; bazı olgularda paylaşılan sanrısal bozukluk (folie à deux) şeklinde de seyredebilir. Primer SP’de altta yatan bir psikiyatrik ya da organik neden bulunmazken, sekonder form depresyon, demans, Parkinson hastalığı, madde kullanımı ve bazı ilaçlarla ilişkilidir. Etiyopatogenezde dopaminerjik sistemde bozulma ve somatik uyaranların yanlış yorumlanması önemli rol oynar. Tanı, gerçek paraziter enfestasyonların dışlanması ve psikiyatrik değerlendirmenin birlikte yürütülmesiyle konur. Tedavide ikinci kuşak antipsikotikler (risperidon, aripiprazol, olanzapin) ön plandadır; Bilişsel Davranışçı Terapi (BDT) tedaviye uyumu ve içgörüyü artırabilir. Multidisipliner yaklaşım, empatik iletişim ve güvene dayalı terapötik ilişki, SP yönetiminin temelini oluşturur. Bu derleme, klinik zorlukları ve güncel tanı-tedavi stratejilerini özetleyerek sağlık profesyonellerine bütüncül bir bakış açısı sunmayı amaçlamaktadır.

Background: Infective endocarditis (IE) is a rare but serious infection in children, often leading to life-threatening complications and long-term morbidity. Many cases are preventable through essential measures such as maintaining proper dental and skin hygiene, identifying high-risk groups, and using antibiotics appropriately during specific procedures. As digital platforms like YouTube become common sources of health information, evaluating the accuracy and comprehensiveness of such content is crucial, particularly for specialized topics like pediatric IE prevention. Aim: This study aimed to assess the reliability, quality, and accuracy of YouTube videos related to IE prophylaxis in children. Materials and Methods: A YouTube search was conducted using relevant keywords. Eligible videos were evaluated based on uploader characteristics, video metrics, and content coverage. Three validated scoring tools, Modified DISCERN, JAMA, and the Global Quality Score (GQS) were used to assess reliability and quality. Results: Among 42 videos, 57% (n=24) were uploaded by professional content creators. The median number of key topics addressed per video was 3.5 (IQR 2–7), and only four videos covered all key topics. A substantial positive correlation was observed between MDISCERN and GQS scores. The JAMA score correlated positively with number of views (r = 0.391, p = 0.011), while GQS showed a strong positive correlation with video duration (r = 0.619, p &lt; 0.001). Conclusion: The quality and reliability of YouTube videos on IE prophylaxis remain highly variable. Pediatric-specific content and guideline adherence are frequently lacking. Improving the accuracy and comprehensiveness of online health education is essential to support evidence-based practice in vulnerable pediatric populations.

We would like to thank Harsanyi et al [...]

Heart disease is a major cause of death around the world. Accurate predictions in the early stages can provide additional time for treatment and significantly increase the likelihood of survival. Traditional methods rely on manual diagnosis, which usually occurs when patients already have obvious symptoms. This study uses machine learning to predict heart disease and identify key risk factors, aiming to find a model that can provide accurate and reliable predictions to assist in early clinical diagnosis of heart disease. Among all models, logistic regression performs best with 88.04% accuracy, and its precision, recall, and F1 score also performed the best among the four models. It also identifies the key factors that influence heart disease risk, the research indicates that factors such as sex, type of chest pain, fasting blood sugar, and the slope of the peak exercise ST segment are the main determinants of the risk of heart disease. The results show that this model is reliable for medical risk prediction and decision support.

Dilin matematiksel düzlemi sayılan söz dizimi, özellikle yabancı dil öğretiminde üzerinde durulması, diller arası farklılıkların ortaya çıktığı ve incelenmesi gereken bir dil düzlemidir. Dil bilgisinin alt dallarından söz dizimi ile alakalı olan biçim bilimsel istem; diller, ağızlar ve hatta aynı dilde tarihî süreç içerisinde değişiklik gösteren bir konudur. Biçim bilimsel istem, bir fiilin ya da ilgecin taşıdığı anlama göre ortaya çıkan söz dizimsel boşluklardır. Türkiye Türkçesi gramer kitaplarında genellikle fiil-tamlayıcı ve yüklem-hâl eki ilişkisi bağlamında özellikle fiiller ile değerlendirilen istem konusu, fiillerin yanı sıra ilgeçlerde de görülmektedir. Bu söz dizimsel boşlukların doldurulması, tümcelerin daha anlamlı ve doğru olmalarını sağlamaktadır. Bu bağlam kapsamında Ankara Medipol Üniversitesi Türkçe hazırlık bölümünde Türkçe öğrenen ve ana dili Farsça olan A1, A2 ve B1 seviyelerindeki 30 İranlı öğrencinin, Türkçe fiil ve ilgeçlerin biçim bilimsel istemlerini ne oranda doğru bildikleri ön test ile ölçüldükten sonra 8 haftalık eğitim sonunda A2, B1 ve B2 seviyelerine geçen aynı öğrencilere uygulanan son test ile bu öğrencilerdeki başarı oranı ölçülmüş ve biçim bilimsel istem konusunda eğitim almayan öğrenciler ile 8 haftalık eğitim sonunda A2, B1 ve B2 seviyelerine çıkan öğrenciler arasındaki başarı oranı karşılaştırılmıştır. 8 haftalık eğitim sonunda Türkçedeki biçim bilimsel istem konusunda öğrencilerin hata oranlarında düşüşler olduğu bu çalışmada ortaya konulmuştur.

Immune checkpoint inhibitors, PD-1 / PD-L1 inhibitors, have been approved for the treatment of unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma, which actually represents a significant advancement in treatment options for this aggressive type of cancer. However, their effectiveness is often hindered by primary or acquired tumor resistance. It is necessary to study the molecular mechanisms involved and create targeted strategies. Recent findings indicate that the proto-oncogene tyrosine kinase MerTK (MER) is overexpressed in HCC tissues and is significantly associated with poor responses to these inhibitors.This review the various roles of MerTK in the progression of HCC, including its supportive effects on tumor cell survival, migration, and immune evasion. This review also discusses how MerTK promotes immunotherapy resistance by altering the tumor microenvironment, such as reducing the function of anti-tumor immune cells. Additionally, the review considers MerTK's potential as both a therapeutic target and a predictive biomarker, proposing new opportunities to improve the effectiveness of current HCC immunotherapies.

The developed theoretical foundation makes it possible to evaluate the effects of the Activity Calculator in future research.

Abstract Background: Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) is a major cause of morbidity and mortality. Proximal DVT carries a higher risk of pulmonary embolism (PE), but the distinct inflammatory profiles of proximal and distal DVT remain unclear. Objectives: This study aims to compare the distribution of next-generation systemic inflammatory indices (SII, SIRI, AISI, NLR, PLR, MLR) and conventional biomarkers (CRP, D-dimer) and to evaluate the diagnostic and prognostic value of these parameters in predicting PE. Additionally, the effects of demographic and etiological differences between groups on the systemic inflammatory response were analyzed; the findings were validated using logistic regression models and ROC curve metrics to identify independent predictive markers. Methods: In this retrospective case-control study, 750 patients (2019–2025) with suspected lower extremity DVT were classified into proximal DVT (n=250), distal DVT (n=250), and Doppler-negative control group (n=250). Inflammatory indices [SII, SIRI, AISI, NLR, PLR, MLR], conventional biomarkers (CRP, D-dimer), and biochemical parameters were evaluated. Group differences were tested using ANOVA/Kruskal–Wallis, while logistic regression and ROC analyses identified predictors of proximal DVT and PE. Results: Patients with proximal DVT had significantly higher inflammatory indices, CRP, and D-dimer values compared to those with distal DVT and controls (all p

Bu araştırma, annelerin eğitim düzeyi ile çocuklarında İşitsel İşlemleme Bozukluğu farkındalığı ve eğitsel müdahale süreci arasındaki ilişkiyi incelemektedir. İşitsel İşlemleme Bozukluğu, işitme normal olmasına rağmen, gürültülü ortamlarda konuşmaları anlama güçlüğüdür. Çalışmaya eğitim düzeyine göre dört gruba ayrılmış 101 anne katılmış ve araştırmacı tarafından hazırlanan anketi doldurmuştur. Veriler Ki-Kare ve Fisher’s Exact testleri ile analiz edilmiştir. Annelerin eğitim düzeyi ile İşitsel İşlemleme Bozukluğu farkındalığı arasında anlamlı bir fark bulunamamıştır. Ayrıca, çocuğu için dil-konuşma uzmanına başvuru yapan ve yapmayan anneler arasında da fark gözlenmemiştir. Farkındalık eksikliği, çocuğun yaşadığı zorlukların disleksi gibi diğer nörogelişimsel bozukluklarla karıştırılmasına neden olabilir. İşitsel İşlemleme Bozukluğu dil ve konuşma gecikmesi, okuma-yazma güçlüğü ve akademik başarısızlıkla ilişkilidir. Bu durum öğrenme güçlüğü veya diğer gelişimsel bozuklar olmayıp, işlemleme farklılığıdır. Erken tanı, bireyselleştirilmiş eğitim programları ve disiplinler arası iş birliği ile desteklenmelidir. Ailelerin bu konuda bilinçlendirilmesi önem taşımaktadır.

Embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma is a distinct subtype of rhabdomyosarcoma commonly seen in children less than 5 years of age, but it can appear at any age. It's frequently seen at the head and neck region, but rare sites include the ear. It often presents with facial nerve palsy. We present two extraordinary cases of embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma in the middle ear in a 3-year-old boy and girl.

<title>Abstract</title> Background To investigate the effect of hydroxychloroquine sulphate combined with aspirin and enoxaparin sodium in treating recurrent miscarriage (RM) associated with undifferentiated connective tissue disease. Methods Pregnant women with RM admitted to Wuhai Maternal and Child Health Hospital between January 2021 and August 2024 were enrolled and assigned to groups based on different treatment regimens: control Group 1 (progesterone + enoxaparin sodium, n = 45), control Group 2 (aspirin + enoxaparin sodium, n = 45), and the exposed group (hydroxychloroquine sulphate + aspirin + enoxaparin sodium, n = 45). Pregnancy complications, pregnancy outcomes, delivery and neonatal status, serological indicators, imaging parameters, and adverse reactions were compared among the three groups. Data were statistically analysed using SPSS 26.0. Independent/paired <italic>t</italic> -test and one-way analysis of variance were conducted, with <italic>F</italic> -tests performed according to statistical requirements. Results <bold>(1) Baseline Characteristics</bold> : Patients in the exposed group were older and had an earlier gestational age at the last pregnancy termination ( <italic>P</italic> &lt; 0.05). No significant differences were observed in body mass index, gravidity, parity, or number of miscarriages among the groups ( <italic>P</italic> &gt; 0.05). <bold>(2) Pregnancy Complications</bold> : The overall incidence of pregnancy complications showed no significant difference between the exposed group and Control groups 1 and 2 ( <italic>P</italic> &gt; 0.05), indicating that the experimental regimen did not cause additional pregnancy complications. <bold>(3) Pregnancy and Neonatal Outcomes</bold> : The exposed group had significantly higher rates of preterm and term delivery (95.56%) than did the control groups 1 (80.0%) and 2 (77.78%) ( <italic>P</italic> &lt; 0.05). Cesarean section rates showed no significant difference among groups ( <italic>P</italic> &gt; 0.05). Apgar scores showed no significant difference between the exposed and control groups ( <italic>P</italic> &gt; 0.05). <bold>(4) Laboratory and imaging parameters</bold> : The 2-week post-treatment/pre-treatment ratio of human chorionic gonadotropin, estradiol, and progesterone did not differ significantly ( <italic>P</italic> &gt; 0.05). Yolk sac size, gestational sac-foetal pole difference, and uterine artery blood flow did not differ significantly between the exposed group and Control groups 1 and 2 ( <italic>P</italic> &gt; 0.05). Notably, the exposed group had the smallest gestational sac-foetal pole difference among the groups ( <italic>P</italic> &lt; 0.05), suggesting improved embryonic developmental potential. <bold>(5) Adverse Reactions</bold> : The exposed group showed no additional adverse reactions compared with Control groups 1 and 2, with no increased incidence of gastrointestinal reactions, liver dysfunction, bleeding tendency, rash, thrombocytopenia, or blurred vision ( <italic>P</italic> &gt; 0.05). Conclusion Combining hydroxychloroquine sulphate, aspirin, and enoxaparin sodium for treating RM associated with undifferentiated connective tissue disease improves pregnancy outcomes and demonstrates a favorable safety profile, with no observed additional adverse reactions.

Background: Metabolic acidosis is common in maintenance hemodialysis (MHD) patients and is associated with protein catabolism; bicarbonate supplementation could be beneficial. Aims and Objectives: The study aimed to explore the effects of oral sodium bicarbonate supplementation on nutritional parameters in MHD patients, find its optimal dosage, and side effects. Materials and Methods: A single-center, prospective, open-label, randomized, parallel-group study was conducted in Tribhuvan University Teaching Hospital, Kathmandu. A total of 58 patients on MHD with serum HCO3 &lt;22 mEq/L were randomized with 29 patients each in the control and intervention arm. The intervention arm received oral sodium bicarbonate to maintain venous bicarbonate level &gt;22 mEq/L along with standard care, whereas the control group received standard care alone. The mid-upper arm circumference (MUAC), mid-thigh circumference (MTC), body weight, body mass index, and serum albumin were compared between the groups at baseline and at the end of 3 months. A block randomization using computer-generated random numbers with equal allocation in two groups was used by a statistician, who was not part of the study. The sample size was determined using the standard formula for comparing two independent means, based on expected group differences and variances, with 95% confidence and 80% power. Allowing for a 10% loss to follow-up, 64 patients were enrolled. Results: Serum bicarbonate increased from 17.70±2.13 to 22.28±1.84 after treatment with oral sodium bicarbonate; the mean dose required was 2931.03±622.84 mg/day. At 3 months, the bicarbonate arm showed a significantly higher MUAC (22.37±2.03 vs. 20.0±1.94, P&lt;0.001) and MTC (40.14±4.33 vs. 37.8±2.48, P=0.02) compared with the control. Serum albumin significantly improved in the intervention arm (40.11±2.85 vs. 36.96±3.52, P&lt;0.001) as compared to the control. Seven (24.1%) patients receiving bicarbonate developed mild dyspepsia. Conclusion: In Nepalese patients on MHD, oral sodium bicarbonate targeting venous bicarbonate to &gt;22 mEq/L was associated with significant improvement in clinical and biochemical markers of nutrition.

Objective: To provide a narrative overview of the scientific knowledge on Last Aid Courses and experiences from different countries. Background: The levels of death literacy, grief literacy, and knowledge about palliative care are low in many countries around the world. For many people, dying, death, and grief are still a taboo. Public Palliative Care Education (PPCE), the public knowledge approach, and the Last Aid Course (LAC) aim to increase death literacy, grief literacy, and public knowledge about palliative care. Methods: A literature search in the databases PubMed/Medline, CINAHL, and PsycInfo was undertaken. Other additional sources were found by hand searching, books, reference lists, and the internet. A narrative overview of the existing literature on LAC and Public Palliative Care Education (PPCE) is provided. Experiences with PPCE and LAC from different countries are presented. Based on the findings, a future agenda for research on PPCE and LAC is presented. Results and Discussion: PPCE and LAC have been introduced in 23 countries. A total of 17 articles and reviews on Last Aid were included. Research on the effects of LAC in different countries and cultural issues connected to LAC are ongoing. Conclusions: Since 2015, LACs have been introduced in 23 different countries. The LAC, the LAC-KT, and PPCE may enhance the public debate on dying, death, grief, and palliative care and may empower people to contribute to end-of-life care in the community. Future research on PPCE, the LAC, and the LAC-KT should focus on retention over time and the long-term effects of the courses.

Objective: To compare the immediate recovery effects of cold compression (CC) and ischemic preconditioning with ice (IPCice) on muscle recovery, this study was conducted.Methods: Athletes were randomly assigned to CC (n=12), IPCice (n=12), or control (n=12) groups. All participants completed a fatigue-inducing jump rope protocol targeting the gastrocnemius prior to recovery interventions. CC involved 20 minutes of alternating pressure (25–75 mmHg) on the gastrocnemius muscles. IPCice involved thigh cuffs inflated to 200 mmHg (2 minutes on/off cycles for 20 minutes) with manual ice application. Thirty-six amateur mixed martial arts (MMA) athletes. Muscle pain, congestion, strength, creatine kinase, muscle stiffness, perfusion, pressure pain threshold, reactive strength index, and total quality recovery were assessed at rest, post-exercise, post-treatment, and 48 hours later.Results: Post-treatment, CC significantly improved perfusion (p&lt;0.001) and reduced muscle soreness in both legs compared to IPCice and control (p≤0.02). CC also resulted in significantly higher PPT values (p≤0.006). Benefits on some variables remained at 48 hours.Conclusion: Both modalities enhanced recovery following fatiguing exercise; however, CC demonstrated superior effectiveness in attenuating fatigue-related impairments, particularly in perfusion, soreness, and muscle function, highlighting its practical advantage over IPCice for MMA athletes.

Infeksi Saluran Pernapasan Akut (ISPA) masih menjadi salah satu penyebab utama morbiditas dan mortalitas pada balita di Indonesia. Faktor yang berhubungan dengan kejadian ISPA antara lain pemberian ASI eksklusif, status gizi, anggota keluarga perokok, dan pengetahuan orang tua. Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mengetahui hubungan faktorfaktor tersebut dengan kejadian ISPA pada balita usia 0–59 bulan di wilayah kerja Puskesmas Padang Ulak Tanding Tahun 2025. Penelitian ini menggunakan pendekatan analitik observasional dengan desain cross sectional. Populasi penelitian adalah seluruh balita usia 0 – 59 bulan di wilayah kerja puskesmas Padang Ulak Tanding tahun 2025 sebanyak 567 balita. Sampel penelitian sebanyak 123 responden yang dipilih dengan menggunakan metode Accidental Sampling. Pengolahan data dilakukan melalui analisis univariat dan bivariat menggunakan uji Chi-square dengan tingkat signifikasi 0.05. Hasil penelitian menunjukkan bahwa terdapat hubungan antara ASI eksklusif dengan kejadian ISPA (p= 0,001). Status gizi juga berhubungan signifikan dengan ISPA (p= 0,001). Balita yang tinggal bersama anggota keluarga perokok memiliki risiko lebih tinggi mengalami ISPA (p= 0,001). Selain itu, pengetahuan orang tua juga berhubungan dengan kejadian ISPA (p= 0,001). Kesimpulan, terdapat hubungan signifikan antara pemberian ASI eksklusif, status gizi, anggota keluarga perokok, dan pengetahuan orang tua dengan kejadian ISPA pada balita. Hasil ini dapat menjadi dasar bagi Puskesmas dalam melakukan promosi kesehatan tentang ASI eksklusif, gizi balita, bahaya rokok, serta edukasi bagi orang tua.

Bu çalışmanın amacı, Havsa’nın sosyodemografik özellikleri ile nüfusun Havsa’da yaşamaktan duyduğu memnuniyet düzeyinin belirleyicilerinin incelenmesi ve 2012 yılındaki bulgularla karşılaştırılmasıdır. Bu amaca yönelik olarak hem sosyodemografik özellikler hem de farklı memnuniyet sorularına yönelik olarak betimleyici istatistik ve memnuniyet düzeyinin belirleyicilerini tespit etmeye yönelik lojistik regresyon analizleri uygulanmıştır. Analizlerde kullanılan bağımsız değişkenler, literatürde yer alan çalışmalar incelenerek seçilmeye çalışılmıştır. 2021 yılı sonu itibariyle kent merkezi ve köylerde toplamda 18.302 kişinin yaşadığı Havsa’da %5 hata payı ve %95 güven düzeyine göre asgari 377 kişilik bir örneklem seçilmesi gerekmektedir. 389 kişiye uygulanan bu anket çalışmasında, tıpkı 2012 yılında gerçekleştirilmiş olduğu gibi, 22 köy ve ilçe merkezinin nüfuslarına göre ağırlıklandırma yapılarak tabakalı örneklem yöntemi seçilmiştir. Gerçekleştirilen bu analizler neticesinde, çalışmanın en belirgin sonuçları arasında, Havsa ilçe halkının gelir düzeyinin asgari ücret düzeyinde olduğu, çalışma durumunda en yüksek oranın işçi olarak çalışanlarda gerçekleştiği, Havsa’da yaşamaktan memnun olanların oranının eğitim düzeyi azaldıkça arttığı, herhangi bir işte çalışmayanların görece az memnuniyet duyduğu; ancak, buna karşın, evlilerin bekârlara göre Havsa’da bulunmaktan daha çok memnuniyet duydukları tespit edilmiştir. 10 yıl öncesine göre bir karşılaştırma yapıldığında ise Havsa ilçe halkının gelir düzeyinin reel olarak özellikle kırsalda azalmış, çalışma durumunda en yüksek oran çiftçiden işçiye geçmiş ve Havsa’da yaşamaktan memnun olanların oranının düşmüş olduğu tespit edilmiştir. Söz konusu bulgular ışığında, nüfusun ama özellikle kırsal nüfusun azalmasının önüne geçebilmek adına eğitim düzeyinin yükseltilmesi, tarımsal gelirde artış gerçekleşmesi ve kırsal alanları destekleyen politikalar geliştirilmesi önerilebilir.

Occupational accidents are unintended and unforeseen events, not caused by deliberate actions, which may result in losses in terms of time, property, and even human life. Behaviors associated with occupational accidents among farmers include inadequate use of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE), non-compliance with safety procedures, errors in operating tools and machinery, lack of concentration, and negligence in following safety instructions for products such as pesticides. This study aims to examine the relationship between behavior (knowledge, attitudes, and practices) and occupational accidents among farmers in West Kotamobagu District. This research employed an analytical observational design with a cross-sectional approach. The study was conducted in West Kotamobagu District with a total population of 946 farmers. A sample of 90 farmers was selected using the Simple Random Sampling technique. Data analysis was carried out using the Chi-Square test. The findings revealed that knowledge (p = 0.000), attitude (p = 0.017), and practice (p = 0.007) were significantly associated with occupational accidents among farmers in West Kotamobagu District. Poor knowledge regarding occupational health and safety (OHS) and agricultural hazards, negative attitudes toward PPE usage, and undisciplined practices in its application were closely linked to the high incidence of occupational accidents among farmers. Adequate knowledge and awareness positively influence the adoption of safe behaviors, such as the proper and consistent use of complete PPE, thereby reducing the risk of occupational accidents.

Objective: To assess the frequency of hormonal imbalances and their connection with sexual dysfunction in male patients taking proton pump inhibitors for at least three months. Study Design: Cross-sectional study Place and Duration of Study: Conducted in an Outpatient Endocrinology Clinic at CMH Rawalpindi, Pakistan from Feb to Apr 2024. Methodology: A group of 150 male patients who had been taking proton pump inhibitors regularly for three months or more were included in the study. Participants were evaluated for sexual complaints, and serum levels of prolactin, sex hormone-binding globulins, total testosterone, and progesterone were recorded. Statistical analysis was done to identify significant differences and correlations between hormonal levels and sexual dysfunction symptoms. Results: Among the 150 participants, 90 reported sexual complaints, while 60 did not. Patients with sexual complaints had significantly different mean serum levels of prolactin (p&lt;0.001), sex hormone-binding globulins (p=0.043), total testosterone (p&lt;0.001), and progesterone (p=0.001) compared to those without sexual complaints. Higher prolactin levels were noted in patients with sexual complaints (p&lt;0.001). Significant correlations were found between serum prolactin levels and sex hormone-binding globulins (p=0.003), total testosterone (p=0.008), and progesterone (p&lt;0.001). Symptoms such as decreased libido (p=0.001), erectile dysfunction (p=0.001), and decreased semen volume (p&lt;0.001) showed significant variation between normal and hyperprolactinemic patients. Conclusion: Long-term use of proton pump inhibitors in male patients is linked with significant hormonal imbalances that may contribute to sexual dysfunction. Monitoring and managing these hormonal changes are essential for improving the quality of life in affected patients.

The article by Abdellaouia et al. compellingly addresses the phenomenon of individuals living without sexual activity and who have never engaged in it. The authors examine this relevant aspect of human behavior through a large-scale analysis of a sample including genetic patterns, social factors, and personality traits. Several sociodemographic, behavioral, and genetic factors, as well as their interactions, were analyzed in individuals experiencing sexlessness. A point that requires further emphasis is that, in some cases, sexlessness may result from traumatic life experiences, which can profoundly affect mental health and lead to significant consequences for sexuality and sexual behavior. For example, childhood sexual trauma is increasingly recognized as a risk factor for psychosis. Furthermore, sexuality can be influenced by traumatic attachment in primary relationships, traumatic experiences, and posttraumatic stress disorder.

Penyakit jantung coroner (PJK) menyumbang 36% kematian global. Prevalensi PJK di Indonesia cukup tinggi disebabkan karena kolesterol total yang tinggi. Oleh sebab itu, pengelolaan kolesterol melalui perilaku perawatan diri menjadi aspek penting dalam pencegahan dan pengendalian penyakit jantung ini. Tujuan penelitian ini untuk mengetahui hubungan antara perilaku perawatan diri dan kadar kolesterol total pasien PJK. Metode penelitian melalui pendekatan kuantitatif dengan desain cross-sectional. Sampel terdiri dari 49 pasien yang dipilih secara purposive sampling yaitu responden PJK dengan usia &gt;18 tahun. Data dikumpulkan melalui kuesioner perilaku perawatan diri dan hasil pemeriksaan kadar kolesterol total, selanjutnya dianalisis dengan uji Chi-Square. Hasilnya menunjukkan bahwa 38,78% responden memiliki perilaku perawatan diri baik, 46,94% memadai, dan 14,29% buruk. Sebanyak 48,98% responden memiliki kadar kolesterol total dalam batas normal, sedangkan 51,02% tidak normal. Uji Chi-Square menunjukkan adanya hubungan signifikan antara perilaku perawatan diri dan kadar kolesterol total (p = 0,022), dengan koefisien korelasi sebesar 0,7662 yang menunjukkan hubungan kuat dan positif. Kesimpulan dari penelitian ini adalah terdapat hubungan yang bermakna dan kuat antara perilaku perawatan diri dan kadar kolesterol total pada pasien CHD. Disarankan peningkatan edukasi dan motivasi pasien untuk menerapkan perilaku perawatan diri guna mengontrol kolesterol dan mencegah komplikasi.

2019'da başlayan COVID-19 pandemisi dünya çapında değişikliklere neden olmuş ve AB ülkelerinde tüm toplumu etkilemiştir. Pandemi sırasında sosyal hayattan karantinaya geçişle birlikte, bireyler psikolojilerinde olumsuz değişiklikler yaşamıştır. Bu değişiklik kadınlar için daha da olumsuz dönüşümlere neden olmuştur. Pandemi sırasında uygulanan karantina ve önlemler, hane ekonomilerini ve aile ilişkilerini olumsuz etkilemiştir. Bu dönemde kadınlar ekonomik gerilemeden önemli ölçüde etkilenmiştir. Aynı zamanda, uzaktan eğitimin ortaya çıkmasıyla birlikte kadınların ev işi yükü ve sorumlulukları artmıştır. Bu çalışmada, pandemi sırasında AB üyesi olan Almanya ve Polonya'da COVID-19 pandemisinin kadınlar üzerindeki etkileri incelenmektedir. COVID-19 pandemisi sırasında Almanya ve Polonya'da yaşayan kadınların karşılaştığı ekonomik etki, artan ev işi yükü ve yetersiz sosyal destek dahil olmak üzere sorunlar araştırılmıştır.

Background. Hemiplegic cerebral palsy presents with lateralized impairments that may influence developmental outcomes. While literature suggests lesion laterality affects domains such as language and spatial awareness, clinical consensus remains unclear. Purpose. To determine whether rehabilitation professionals observe differences in development or functional outcomes between right and left hemiplegia in children. Method. A cross-sectional survey of licensed pediatric rehabilitation professionals was conducted. Quantitative data were analyzed using descriptive statistics, Chi-square test and logistic regression. Qualitative responses were thematically analyzed. Results. 63.3% of total (n=49) pediatrics rehabilitation professionals report perceiving difference between hemiplegia types. Right hemiplegia was significantly associated with speech and language difficulties with a 61.3% of all participants. Motor deficits were the most commonly observed domain with 74.2% of participants. Cultural factors, such as religious emphasis on right-hand use, were noted to influence rehabilitation outcomes. Conclusion. The findings of this study, supported by previous literature, reinforce the hypothesis that developmental and functional differences are perceived between left and right hemiplegic cerebral palsy. Rehabilitation specialists should adopt a holistic approach that considers both lesion severity and cultural norms influencing perceptions of development and function. Integrating neurobiological and sociocultural factors is essential for individualized rehabilitation strategies.

การวิจัยนี้มีวัตถุประสงค์เพื่อ 1) พัฒนาและหาประสิทธิภาพของหนังสืออิเล็กทรอนิกส์ เรื่อง การออกแบบงานด้วยโปรแกรมอโดบี โฟโทช็อปให้มีประสิทธิภาพตามเกณฑ์ 80/80 2) ศึกษาผลการเรียนก่อนและหลังเรียนโดยใช้หนังสืออิเล็กทรอนิกส์เรื่อง การออกแบบงานด้วยโปรแกรมอโดบี โฟโทช็อป และ 3) ศึกษาความพึงพอใจของนักศึกษาอุตสาหกรรมศิลป์ที่มีต่อหนังสืออิเล็กทรอนิกส์ เรื่อง การออกแบบงานด้วยโปรแกรมอโดบี โฟโทช็อป กลุ่มตัวอย่างที่ใช้ในวิจัยครั้งนี้ได้จากการสุ่มตัวอย่างแบบเจาะจง (Purposive Sampling) คือ นักศึกษาอุตสาหกรรมศิลป์จำนวน 38 คน เครื่องมือที่ใช้ในการวิจัย ได้แก่ 1) หนังสืออิเล็กทรอนิกส์ เรื่อง การออกแบบงานด้วยโปรแกรมอโดบี โฟโทช็อป 2) แบบทดสอบวัดผลการเรียนก่อนและหลังเรียน และ 3) แบบสอบถามความพึงพอใจ สถิติที่ใช้ในการวิเคราะห์ข้อมูล ได้แก่ ค่าร้อยละ ค่าเฉลี่ยส่วนเบี่ยงเบนมาตรฐาน และการทดสอบ Wilcoxon Signed-Rank ผลการวิจัย พบว่า 1) ประสิทธิภาพของหนังสืออิเล็กทรอนิกส์เรื่องการออกแบบงานด้วยโปรแกรมอโดบี โฟโทช็อปสำหรับนักศึกษาอุตสาหกรรมศิลป์ มีประสิทธิภาพเท่ากับ 83/87.81 ซึ่งเป็นไปตามเกณฑ์ที่กำหนด 2) ผลสัมฤทธิ์ทางการเรียนคะแนนหลังเรียนสูงกว่าคะแนนก่อนอย่างมีนัยสำคัญทางสถิติ และ 3) ความพึงพอใจของนักศึกษาอุตสาหกรรมศิลป์ที่มีต่อสื่อหนังสืออิเล็กทรอนิกส์ เรื่อง การออกแบบงานด้วยโปรแกรมอโดบี โฟโทช็อป ในด้านเนื้อหาอยู่ในระดับมาก ด้านการออกแบบสื่ออยู่ในระดับมาก ด้านการใช้งานอยู่ในระดับมาก ระดับความพึงพอใจโดยรวมอยู่ในระดับมาก

Background: Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection remains a global health issue, particularly in Africa and Asia. Cognitive impairment may early develop in individuals living with HIV and can therefore potentially impact nutritional status. This study aimed to assess the correlation between cognitive function and nutritional status in pre-elderly individuals with HIV.Methods: A cross-sectional study was conducted from March 2023 to October 2024 among individuals living with HIV aged 45–59 years in Jakarta, Indonesia. Cognitive function was measured using the Indonesian version of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA-Ina) and nutritional status was evaluated using body mass index (BMI). Data were analyzed using the Chi-square test with Jeffrey’s Amazing Statistics Program (JASP).Results: Of the 157 respondents, most were male (75.2%) with a mean age of 49±4.17 years. The majority were unmarried (44.6%), employed (70.1%), had incomes below the Jakarta minimum wage (74.5%), and had completed senior high school education (56.0%). Mild cognitive impairment was found in 70.7% of participants, whereas normal nutritional status was the most common (45.9%). However, no significant relationship was found between cognitive function and nutritional status (p=0.161). Conclusion: Mild cognitive impairment is prevalent among pre-elderly individuals with HIV, most of whom have normal nutritional status. Although no significant relationship is observed between cognitive function and nutritional status, these findings highlight the importance of incorporating early cognitive screening into routine HIV care to support healthy aging and timely identification and management of cognitive decline.

Body composition is a key factor for performance in volleyball and helps to achieve an optimal ratio of lean-to fat mass needed for agility, power and endurance. The aim of this study was to assess the Body Mass Index (BMI) and body fat percentage (BF%) of senior men’s volleyball players in Kirtipur Municipality in terms of their general fitness profile. A descriptive research design was used, and descriptive statistics of 36 players in four wards, were performed across three thematic dimensions: general anthropometric trends, ward-level differences and association of BMI with BF%. The results revealed that many players were overweight according to BMI but their percentages of body fat were of moderate and attainable range, which means that the excess BMI was a result of higher lean muscle mass and not of overweight. The same kind of thing can also be observed from analysis of ward-wise categories. Players in Ward No. 3 possessed the greatest BMI and BF% combination, indicating worse conditioning conditions, whereas in Ward No. 10 their low BF% looked leaner and more agile. These results demonstrate the criticality of using the BF% in combination with BMI in order to determine the true level of fitness in volleyball players.

Bu çalışmada, 6360 sayılı yasa kapsamında Aydın ilinde bulunan orman köylerinin mahalleye dönüşümünün köylüler üzerindeki etkilerini incelemeyi amaçlamaktadır. Araştırmada konuya ilişkin literatür taraması yapılarak yasanın hukuki ve idari boyutları incelenmiş ve sonrasında Aydın ilinde seçilen orman köylerinde anket çalışması yapılmış ve köylülerin görüşleri alınmıştır. Anket yöntemi ile katılımcıların demografik profili, yasa hakkında bilgi düzeyleri ve köylerin sosyal-ekonomik durumlarındaki değişimleri değerlendirilmiştir. Bulgular, yasa ile hizmetlere erişim ve altyapı alanlarında olumlu etkiler oluştuğunu, ancak resmi işlemler ve tüzel kişiliğin kaybı gibi bazı durumların orta düzeyde olumsuzluk yarattığını göstermektedir. Çalışma, köylerin sosyal ve ekonomik yaşamında genel olarak iyileşme sağlansa da idari ve ekonomik alanda bazı sınırlamaların devam ettiğini ortaya koymaktadır. Sonuç olarak, 6360 sayılı yasanın Aydın ilinde bulunan orman köylerinde ekonomik, sosyal ve idari anlamda önemli etkiler yarattığı ancak bu süreçte köylülerin bilgilendirilme ve uyum sağlama konusunda zorluklar yaşadığı görülmüştür. Çalışma, yasa uygulamalarının kırsal alanlardaki toplumsal ve ekonomik etkilerini anlamaya yönelik katkı sağlamaktadır.

Bu araştırmada, yabancılara Türkçe öğreten öğretim elemanlarının dinleme becerisine ilişkin görüşleri incelenmiş; öğretim süreci, ölçme-değerlendirme uygulamaları ve karşılaşılan sorunlar nitel araştırma yöntemlerinden yararlanılarak olgubilim deseniyle ortaya konulmuştur. Araştırmanın çalışma grubunu, kolay örneklemeyle seçilen TÖMER’de görev yapan beş katılımcı oluşturmaktadır. Bu araştırmadaki veriler, odak grup görüşmesinde yarı yapılandırılmış görüşme formuyla toplanmıştır. Elde edilen veriler, MAXQDA 24 programı aracılığıyla içerik analizi yoluyla çözümlenmiştir. Bulgular, öğreticilerin dinleme becerisini dil ediniminin temel bileşeni olarak gördüklerini ortaya koymuştur. Dinlemenin özellikle doğru telaffuzun öğrenilmesi ve kelime dağarcığının gelişimi açısından kritik olduğu ifade edilmiştir. Öğretim sürecinde ise “kitaba bağlı öğretim” ve “şarkılarla öğretim” en sık kullanılan yöntemler olarak öne çıkarken; mizah, film gibi çoklu ortam destekli yaklaşımların sınırlı kullanıldığı görülmüştür. Katılımcılar, ölçme-değerlendirme süreçlerinde standart bir ölçeğin bulunmamasından, sürenin yetersizliğinden ve değerlendirmelerin öznelliğinden bahsetmişlerdir. Ders kitaplarının içerik bakımından öğrenci seviyesine uygun olmaması, yapay metinler içermesi ve kültürel bağlamdan uzak olması da sıkça dile getirilmiştir. Eğitim ortamında ise kalabalık sınıflar, teknik donanım eksiklikleri ve oturma düzeni gibi yapısal sorunların ölçme sürecini olumsuz etkilediği belirlenmiştir. Diller için Avrupa Ortak Başvuru Metni’ne uygun ölçme uygulamalarında öğreticilerin bilgi eksikliği ve metinlerin doğallıktan uzak oluşu başlıca sorunlar arasında yer almıştır. Bu bulgular doğrultusunda, dinleme öğretimi ve ölçme süreçlerinin daha sistematik, işlevsel ve öğrenci odaklı biçimde yapılandırılması gerektiği sonucuna ulaşılmıştır. Öğretim sürecinde özellikle çoklu ortam destekli materyallerin çeşitlendirilmesi ve öğrencilerin ilgisini çekecek doğal, kültürel bağlam içeren içeriklere yer verilmesi önerilmektedir. Ayrıca, öğretim elemanlarının Diller İçin Avrupa Ortak Başvuru Metni doğrultusunda ölçme araçları geliştirme, subjektifliği azaltacak dereceli puanlama anahtarları oluşturma ve değerlendirme sürecini daha geçerli ve güvenilir hâle getirme konularında hizmet içi eğitimlerle desteklenmesi önemlidir. Ders kitaplarının güncellenmesi, metinlerin doğallık düzeyinin artırılması ve öğrenci seviyelerine uygun içeriklerin geliştirilmesi de dikkat edilmesi gereken hususlar arasındadır. Eğitim ortamında teknik donanım yetersizliklerinin giderilmesi, sınıf mevcudunun ideal seviyeye çekilmesi ve dinleme ölçme sürecine uygun fiziksel düzenlemelerin yapılması önerilmektedir.

ABSTRACT Background Although previous studies have suggested an association between hemoglobin (Hb) concentration and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), the precise cause‐and‐effect relationship between them is still unclear. This study aims to investigate the causal correlation between Hb concentration and ALS, and explore the potential genes related to their association. Methods We extracted summary statistical data of Hb concentration and ALS from genome‐wide association studies (GWAS), performed Mendelian randomization (MR) analyses, and conducted RNA sequencing of motor neurons different from ALS patient‐derived induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), followed by an intersection analysis between differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in ALS motor neurons and selected instrumental variables (IVs) associated with Hb concentration. Results As a result, Hb concentration had a negative causal relationship with the risk of ALS, established through IVW (OR = 0.854; 95% CI: 0.767–0.951; p = 0.00418) of the univariable MR analysis. A multivariable MR further confirmed that this causal link remained robust, even when accounting for confounders including systolic blood pressure, total cholesterol levels, body mass index, LDL cholesterol, diastolic blood pressure, and smoking. Importantly, genetically predicted ALS did not show a causal connection to Hb concentration. Additionally, RNA sequencing analysis and qRT‐PCR results revealed that transcripts for BACH1 and FLVCR1 were upregulated, while those for TRIM58 were downregulated in SOD1 D90A ALS motor neurons, compared to the control. In motor neurons differentiated from a sporadic ALS patient‐derived iPSCs, qRT‐PCR showed increased transcript levels of BACH1 , and decreased transcript levels of FLVCR1 and TRIM58 . These three genes were intersected with harmonized SNPs between Hb concentration and ALS. Conclusion Our study concludes that genetically predicted Hb concentration exhibited an independent inverse causal association with the risk of developing ALS, with potential involvement of genes such as BACH1 , FLVCR1 , and TRIM58 .

An oxime-bridged nitropyrazole–tetrazole gives two concomitant polymorphs (3-α, and 3-β) whose oxime-directed conformational differences dictate packing, thermal stability, and RDX-like detonation performance.

Background: It is well-known that rotating shift work disrupts the circadian rhythm and sleep quality in nurses. With this study, we aimed to compare subjectively and objectively measured sleep quality in nurses, specifically focusing on any differences that arose in relation to shift work. Methods: This prospective, observational, cross-sectional study was conducted in 2025 in Croatia; a total of 140 nurses participated. Sleep was assessed using the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) and FitBit Charge 3 smartwatch, which monitored sleep over an eight-day period. Results: Most nurses rated their sleep as good or very good, but according to the PSQI questionnaire, all participants were classified as poor sleepers (PSQI &gt; 5). Objective smartwatch measurements showed that nurses working only day shifts had higher sleep scores (median 77, IQR 75–80 vs. 73, IQR 68–76; p &lt; 0.001), significantly longer total sleep duration (median 6.4, IQR 6.3–7.1 vs. 5.5, IQR 5.2–6.2 h; p &lt; 0.001), and longer durations of all sleep stages compared with those working rotating shifts. Conclusions: Most nurses subjectively rated their sleep as good or very good; however, according to the PSQI questionnaire results, all were classified as poor sleepers, with no significant difference related to shift work. Objective measurements using the smartwatch indicated that rotating shift work is associated with significantly poorer sleep quality.

Regenerative dentistry is shifting clinical practice from mechanical repair to biologically driven restoration of dental tissues. Advances in stem cell biology, biomaterials, and molecular signaling now support regeneration of enamel, dentin, pulp, periodontal ligament, and alveolar bone. Dental derived mesenchymal stem cells show strong differentiation,angiogenic,and immunomodulatory capabilities,while modern biomaterials like hydrogels, nanocomposites, bioactive glasses, and smart adhesives enhance remineralization and tissue integration.Biologics such as enamel matrix derivatives, platelet concentrates, and growth factors enable predictable pulp revitalization, and stem cell scaffold constructs promote regeneration of the pulp dentin complex. Periodontal regeneration benefits from photobiomodulation, advanced grafts, hydrogels, and hyaluronan-based systems, with emerging roles for mesenchymal stem cells derived micro RNAs.Rapid developments in 3D bioprinting, decellularized scaffolds, nanodelivery platforms, exosome-based therapies, and AI-driven design are accelerating translation into patient-specific solutions. Together, these innovations outline a paradigm shift toward therapies capable of restoring natural tooth form and function, potentially reducing reliance on traditional fillings, root canals, and periodontal surgery.

Recent behavioral and neurofinance studies continue to reveal that economic behavior has a multifaceted structure, encompassing various dimensions from biology and chemistry to psychology, psychoanalysis, psychopathology, and a range of syndromes. In this context, the pharmacological aspect of the subject, particularly the striking effects of neurotransmitters such as dopamine and serotonin on economic behavior, has been frequently examined in the literature. Another significant dimension of the finance-pharmacology relationship is the endocrine system, with studies focusing on hormones like cortisol providing noteworthy findings. Along with cortisol, the other most intensively studied hormones are sex hormones (testosterone, estrogen, and progesterone). This study aims to make specific inferences based on existing findings in the literature regarding the effects of testosterone and estrogen on financial matters, thereby contributing to the current body of knowledge. In particular, the behavioral effects of testosterone's relationship with aggression and dominance, and estrogen's connection with sedation and inhibition, influence individuals' financial decision-making processes across a broad spectrum.

Objective: Diabetic foot ulcers (DFUs) are a major complication of diabetes mellitus, often complicated by Pseudomonas aeruginosa, a biofilm-forming pathogen associated with delayed wound healing. This study evaluated the prevalence of the pelA gene, a determinant of biofilm production, in P. aeruginosa isolates from DFU patients and assessed systemic immune response through serum interleukin-22 (IL-22) levels. Methods: A cross-sectional study was conducted from May 2024 to January 2025, including 48 DFU patients and 48 age- and sex-matched healthy controls. Wound swabs were collected from patients, and P. aeruginosa isolates were identified using the VITEK-2 system or PCR amplification of the 16S rRNA gene. The presence of the pelA gene was confirmed by PCR. Serum IL-22 concentrations were measured using ELISA. Data were analysed with SPSS v26, using t-tests or Mann–Whitney U tests as appropriate, with P &lt; 0.05 considered significant. Results: All 48 P. aeruginosa isolates (100%) carried the pelA gene. Mean serum IL-22 levels were significantly higher in DFU patients compared with healthy controls (31.04 ± 0.22 pg/mL vs. 28.89 ± 0.84 pg/mL; P = 0.015). Conclusion: The universal detection of pelA highlights its potential as a molecular marker of biofilm-forming P. aeruginosa in DFUs. Elevated IL-22 levels indicate an active host immune response in affected patients. Combined microbial and immunological markers may support improved assessment of infection dynamics in diabetic foot ulcers, although further multicentre and longitudinal studies are warranted.

Sürdürülebilir ulaşım, fosil yakıtlı özel araçlar yerine toplu taşıma ve mikrohareketlilik araçlarının kullanımını teşvik ederek hava kirliliği, gürültü, emisyon salınımı ve ekonomik kayıpların azaltılmasını hedeflemektedir. Son yıllarda, özellikle bisiklet gibi çevreci ulaşım araçlarına yönelik ilginin artması, bu hareketlilik türlerinin mevcut trafik akışı üzerindeki etkilerinin değerlendirilmesini gerekli kılmıştır. Bu çalışmada, Sakarya şehir merkezinde birbiriyle bağlantılı dört kavşaktan biri olan Serdivan Kavşağı’nda bisiklet trafiğindeki artışın motorlu araç trafiğine etkileri, mikrosimülasyon programı kullanılarak analiz edilmiştir. Elde edilen bulgular, sabah zirve saatlerinde bisiklet sayısındaki artışın trafik akışı üzerinde belirli ölçüde etkili olduğunu; ancak anlamlı performans değişimlerinin ancak bisiklet sayısının mevcut düzeyin 5 katına ulaşmasıyla gözlemlendiğini ortaya koymuştur. Akşam zirve saatlerinde ise benzer etkilerin, bisiklet trafiğinin yalnızca 2 kat artması durumunda ortaya çıktığı belirlenmiştir. Bu çalışma, yerel yönetimlerin bisiklet kullanımındaki artışın trafik performansına olası etkilerini değerlendirebilmek adına örnek bir model sunmaktadır.

Background: depression is a prevalent psychological condition among the elderly, often arising from physiological decline and psychosocial stressors associated with aging. The risk is notably higher among older adults residing in social care institutions due to limited social engagement and reduced cognitive stimulation. Non-pharmacological interventions, such as brain gymnastics simple coordinated movements designed to enhance cognitive activity have shown potential benefits but remain underexplored in institutionalized settings. Purpose: this study aimed to evaluate the effectiveness of group activity therapy (GAT) using brain gymnastics in reducing depression levels among institutionalized elderly individuals. Methods: a pre-experimental one-group pretest–posttest design was employed. A total of 37 elderly participants experiencing mild to moderate depression were recruited through total sampling. The intervention consisted of brain gymnastics performed three times per week for two weeks, with each session lasting 15–20 minutes. Depression levels were assessed using the short-form Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS). Data were analyzed using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test. Results: the findings demonstrated a statistically significant reduction in depression scores following the intervention (p &lt; 0.05), indicating that brain gymnastics had a meaningful positive effect on participants’ psychological well-being. Conclusion: brain gymnastics implemented within group activity therapy is an effective, low-cost, and enjoyable non-pharmacological approach to reducing depression among the elderly. The intervention supports improved cognitive stimulation, emotional engagement, and social interaction in institutional care environments.

Bu çalışmada, öğretmenlerin pedagojik tasarım kapasitelerindeki değişimlerin ve sürekliliklerin öğretmen görüşlerine göre tespit edilmesi amaçlanmıştır. Nitel araştırma yönteminde, bütüncül çoklu durum deseninde tasarlanan araştırmanın çalışma grubu, aynı kurumda görev yapan 5 branş ve 2 sınıf öğretmeni olmak üzere toplam 7 katılımcıdan oluşmaktadır. Araştırmada veri toplama aracı olarak yarı yapılandırılmış görüşme formu, gözlem formu ve araştırmacı notları bir arada kullanılmış; verilerin çeşitlemesi ile geçerlik ve güvenirlik artırılmaya çalışılmıştır. Elde edilen veriler betimsel analiz tekniği ile çözümlenmiş ve durumlar arası karşılaştırmalı analizler yapılmıştır. Araştırma bulguları, sekiz temel tema altında düzenlenmiş ve ideal pedagojik hedeflerin pratik gerçeklerle sıklıkla çatıştığı bir tablo ortaya koymuştur. Katılımcıların tamamı, üstün alan bilgisinin tek başına etkili bir öğretim için yetersiz bulduğunu belirtmiştir. Uygulamada iletişim yeteneği, mizaç ve mesleki tecrübenin kritik rol oynadığını göstermiştir. Sınıf içi gözlemler ve araştırmacı notları, öğretmenlerin teori-pratik arasındaki boşluk, teknolojik kısıtlılıklar ve çeşitli veli tutumları nedeniyle zorlandıklarını doğrulamıştır. Buna rağmen öğretmenlerin çoğunun, okulun ve öğrencilerin ihtiyaçlarına göre öğretim programlarında esneklikler sağlayarak bağlama duyarlı tasarımlar gerçekleştirdikleri gözlemlenmiştir.

Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) have been shown to have pro-angiogenic activity, capable of enhancing neovascularization and facilitating the healing of chronic wounds. However, information as such remains rather limited. Here we clearly showed that the fish phosvitin-derived AMP Pt5-1c was able to enhance angiogenesis in both murine full-thickness wound models and zebrafish with vascular defects models. We also showed that Pt5-1c was able to promote endothelial cell motility, adhesion, survival, filopodia protrusion, and induce endothelial tube formation. In addition, we found that Pt5-1c could upregulate production of proangiogenic factors including VEGF, PDGF, FGF and EGF. It was revealed that Pt5-1c promoted endothelial cell motility, growth and survival via activation both PI3K/AKT/mTOR and p38 MAPK pathways as well as HIF-1-VEGF axis. It is apparent that Pt5-1c is a novel candidate of pro-angiogenic agents for vascular regenerative therapy.

Blood-based tau proteoforms are poised to move Alzheimer's diagnostics from specialized imaging to accessible frontline testing, with plasma p-tau217 approaching positron emission tomography (PET) and CSF performance and multi-analyte panels with glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) or neurofilament light (NfL) improving differential diagnosis while reducing invasiveness and cost. Building on the first FDA-cleared plasma assay (Lumipulse G p-tau217/Aβ1-42 Ratio) in May 2025, we anticipate a dual pathway over the next decade in which referral centers use high-plex mass spectrometry (MS) panels for phosphoforms and truncations, while primary care adopts automated high-throughput immunoassays (e.g. chemiluminescent enzyme immunoassay (CLEIA)) for triage, supported by harmonized standard operating procedures (SOPs), cross-matrix calibration, and robust reference materials.

Background/Objectives: This study examines factors associated with child overweight/obesity (OW/OB), pre-COVID-19 and during the COVID-19 pandemic, among all U.S. children aged 10–17 years, with or without developmental disabilities (DD) and, separately, among the subgroup of children diagnosed with a DD. Methods: Using data from the National Survey of Children’s Health (NSCH, 2018–2021), we applied descriptive statistics and multivariate logistic regression analyses to estimate the odds ratios of associations between family resilience, screen time, and childhood overweight/obesity. Family resilience measures families’ communication and problem-solving behaviors. Screentime is time spent on TV, computer, cellphone or electronic devices. Results: In descriptive analyses, during COVID-19, 35.8% of all children were identified as OW/OB compared to 32.8% pre-COVID-19—a weighted increase of 3.0%. Among children with developmental disabilities, OW/OB increased from 37.4% to 39.3%. Children reporting ≥4 h of screentime use increased from pre-COVID-19 to during COVID-19 in both groups (All Children: pre-COVID: 33.5%, during COVID: 41.6%; Developmental Disabilities: pre-COVID: 39.9%, during COVID: 49.4%). Among all children, there was a positive and strong association between screentime use and OW/OB at both pre- and during COVID-19 years. Children belonging to households with low family resiliency had 1.31 times the odds of being overweight/obese (95% CI, 1.06–1.63, p &lt; 0.05) before the pandemic. However, these results were not significant after the pandemic. Conclusions: Prevalence of overweight/obesity in all children and children with DD during the COVID-19 pandemic continued to rise. Screentime was found to be a key determinant in increased weight status. Contrary to our hypothesis, family resilience failed to emerge as a significant protective factor for OW/OB; additional research is needed to explore the protective role of family resiliency on childhood obesity. Study findings may provide insights into developing best practices and tailored interventions with early OW/OB screening and programs tailored towards the youngest group of children aged 10–12 years or below.

Hayatımızın her alanına ve anına sirayet eden teknolojik gelişmeler spordan ayrı olarak düşünülemez. Spor alanında yaşanan teknolojik gelişimler sporcuların rekabet düzeyini arttırırken, antrenörler farklı yöntem arayışlarına başvurmaktadır. Bu yöntemlerin en önde gelenlerinden biri de yapay zekâ kullanımıdır. Telefonlarımızda uygulama olarak veya bilgisayarlarımızdan internet sitesine girerek hızlıca bazı konuları öğrenebildiğimiz ve sorular sorduğumuz yapay zekâ programları şu an teknolojinin geldiği en üst noktalardandır. Günlük hayat akışımızdaki bilgi alışverişini fazlasıyla kolaylaştıran bu programlar tam da bu neden dolayı sporun içerisine entegre olmuştur. Spor ve özele indirgediğimizde futbol, artık yapay zekâ ile iç içe geçmiş durumdadır. Antrenman programları, sporcu performans takipleri, sakatlık riskleri, taktik planlamalar, oyuncu analizi, yetenek seçimi ve fazlası artık yapay zekâ kullanımı ile yapılabilmektedir. Futbolda rekabetçi olabilmek adına yapay zekâ kullanımı mutlaka önemlidir ve doğru kullanıldığında takım performansını optimize etmek için avantajlar sağlamaktadır. Elit futbol takımlarının yapay zekâ kullanımı için özel departmanlar oluşturduğu düşünüldüğünde gelecek yıllarda çok daha fazla ve farklı şekilde yapay zekâ uygulamaları ile karşılaşacağımız söylenebilir. Futbolda kullanılan yapay zekâ teknolojisi antrenör ekibinin istediği şekilde programlanarak yapay zekada bir kişilik oluşturmaktadır ve ekibin bir parçası olarak takımda teknik direktöre artı bir yardımcı antrenör olarak görev yapabilmektedir. Şu an yapay zekâ için yolun henüz başında olduğumuz düşünüldüğünde gelecek yıllarda daha farklı ve büyük gelişmelerin yaşanacağını söyleyebiliriz. İlerleyen yıllarda yapay zekâ kullanımı hakkında çok daha fazla ve detaylı çalışmaların yapılacağı düşünülmektedir. Futbol branşı ile yapay zekanın hem bilgisayar ortamında hem de robotik fiziksel yapay zekâ uygulamaları ile olan çalışmaları görmek mümkün olacaktır. Günümüz literatüründe futbol ve yapay zekâ ilişkili az sayıda çalışma bulunmasından dolayı, bu çalışmanın konusu “futbolda yapay zekâ ve kullanımı” olarak belirlenmiştir.

Abstract The histological heterogeneity of primary tumours across the pan-cancer spectrum poses a formidable barrier to accurate lymph node metastasis assessment, often causing AI systems to make “overconfident errors” on rare variants that lead to missed diagnoses. To address this, we present UPATHLN, a unified diagnostic platform that synergizes a pathology foundation model-based encoder with a decoupled uncertainty estimation mechanism. We developed and validated the system using a large-scale multicentre dataset of 26,229 lymph nodes from 14 distinct primary origins. In internal validation, UPATHLN achieved an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.986. Crucially, the uncertainty module functioned as a decisive fail-safe: by flagging potential false-negative predictions for mandatory pathologist review, it intercepted all missed diagnoses, securing 100% conditional sensitivity across both the development and independent test cohorts—even for tumours from seven unseen primary origins. Concurrently, this mechanism reduced the review burden on negative lymph nodes by 73.2%. Ultimately, UPATHLN sets a new benchmark for safety-critical AI, demonstrating that explicitly modelling uncertainty is key to unlocking reliable, workload-efficient diagnostics at the pan-cancer scale.

Amaç: Bu çalışmada cinsel yolla bulaşan Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Chlamidya trachomatis, Mycoplasma hominis ve Ureaplasma urealyticum patojenlerinin klinik olarak HPV tanısı konmuş hastalardaki sıklığının araştırılması ve yanlış tedavi seçeneklerinin ortadan kaldırılması amaçlanmıştır. Yöntem: Çalışma kapsamına OMÜ Tıp Fakültesi Kadın Hastalıkları ve Doğum Anabilimdalı polikliniğine başvuran vajinal akıntısı olan 92 kadın dahil edilmiştir. 92 kadının 46’sı klinik olarak HPV(+) tanısı almış hasta grubunu, 46’sı klinik olarak HPV(-) kontrol grubunu oluşturmuştur. C.trachomatis ve N.gonorrhoeae Real-time PCR yöntemi ile, M.hominis ve U.urealyticum Mycoplasma IST 2 kit yöntemi ile araştırılmıştır. Bulgular: Mycoplasma IST 2 kiti ile çalışılan örneklerden kontrol ve hasta grubundaki toplam 92 kadından 80’inde (≥104 CFU/ml) üreme saptanmıştır. Ayrıca hasta grubunda 5 kişide hem M.hominis (≥104 CFU/ml) hem de U.urealyticum (≥104 CFU/ml) tespit edilmiştir. Hasta grubundan 43 kişide, kontrol grubundan 37 kişide U.urealyticum izole edilmiştir. Yapılan Fisher ve düzeltilmiş Yates istatistiksel analizde hasta ve kontrol grupları arasında HPV(+)’liğiyle anlamlı bir fark bulunmamıştır (p&gt;0,05). Hasta grubundan izole edilen mikroorganizmaların antibiyotik duyarlılıkları değerlendirildiğinde; en yüksek derecede direnç eritromisin, tetrasiklin, klaritromisine karşı görülmüştür. Tüm M.hominis suşları eritromisin ve tetrasikline dirençli bulunmuştur. Bir hastada test edilen bütün antibiyotiklere direnç saptanmıştır ve bu hastada M.hominis ve U.urealyticum birlikte izole edilmiştir. Kontrol grubunda üreyen 37 U.urealyticum da ise en yüksek derecede direnç ofloksasin ve eritromisine karşı görülmüştür. Duplica Real Time Advanced C.trachomatis ve Duplica Real Time Advanced N.gonorrhoeae kitleri ile çalışılan örneklerden 2 kişide C.trachomatis PCR sonucu pozitif bulunmuştur. Hiçbir hastada N.gonorrhoeae DNA tespit edilememiştir. Pozitif bulunan 2 C.trachomatis DNA sonucu HPV (+) olan hasta grubuna dahil ve bu 2 hastada Mycoplasma IST 2 kiti ile yapılan çalışmada M.hominis ve U.urealyticum pozitifliği de tespit edilmiştir. Sonuç: Sonuç olarak bizim çalışmamızda da diğer çalışmalarla benzer olarak U.urealyticum’a M.hominis’ten daha sık rastlanmıştır. İstatistiksel analizde klinik olarak HPV (+)’liğinin C.trachomatis, U.urealyticum ve M.hominis birlikteliğiyle anlamlı bir ilişkisinin olduğu saptanmamıştır (p&gt;0,05). C.trachomatis, N.gonorrhoeae, M.hominis ve U.urealyticum’un hakkında çalışmalar arttıkça daha doğru sonuçlar elde edilebilecektir.

Objective: To present and summarize the concept of intelligent, closed-loop neuromodulation devices, which aim to identify the specific neural signatures of chronic pain and selectively cancel them. Bibliographic review: This narrative review explores a revolutionary approach at the intersection of neuroscience and artificial intelligence, treating chronic pain as a neural circuit pathology. It discusses how machine learning algorithms can decode complex neural data to isolate pain signals in real-time, enabling the identification of an objective biomarker. Based on this decoding, targeted neurostimulation can deliver precise interventions to disrupt these pathological signals, operating in a closed-loop system (sense-decode-actuate) that is more effective and safer than conventional open-loop therapies. This approach represents the transition from systemic treatments to an adaptive and personalized therapy. Final considerations: It can be considered that this AI-driven paradigm holds promise for a fundamental shift in pain management. By offering a personalized and specific therapy, it represents a potential solution for intractable pain conditions, redefining the treatment for a condition that affects millions and transforming a symptom into a treatable biological signal.

The COVID-19 pandemic necessitated the transition of physiotherapy programmes from traditional face-to-face anatomy teaching to fully online delivery. Studies conducted during this period have documented students’ positive adaptation to online anatomy learning, highlighting benefits such as increased flexibility and reduced stress, while also noting challenges, including diminished practical exposure. Although much of the existing research centres on medical and dental education, there is a relative paucity of studies examining physiotherapy students’ perspectives. In this study, a purposive sample of 53 entry-level physiotherapy students (Years 1–3) completed a questionnaire evaluating their experiences with anatomy education during the pandemic. Responses were compared between groups (Years 1 and 2 versus Year 3) using the Mann–Whitney U test and effect-size calculations. Year 3 students who experienced both face-to-face and online learning preferred practical sessions with silent mentors in the anatomy hall, citing greater active engagement and deeper learning. Conversely, all year groups reported that online assessments, such as the online Objective Structured Practical Examination, were less stressful than traditional formats. Year 1 and 2 students, lacking prior face-to-face practical experience, expressed neutral views regarding online practical components. Overall, while online theory and assessment components were well received, hands-on practical experience remains highly valued for promoting student engagement. These findings support the development of blended anatomy pedagogy that leverages the strengths of both modalities to enhance resilience and adaptability in the face of future educational disruptions.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) metastasis, driven by circulating tumor cells (CTCs), remains a formidable clinical challenge, positioning CTCs' eradication as a pivotal yet underexploited therapeutic frontier for metastasis prevention. Riboflavin photochemical therapy (RPT) has emerged as a promising modality due to its dual capacity to inactivate tumor cells while inducing minimal hematological toxicity. However, the optimal parameters and mechanisms behind RPT-mediated CTCs' inactivation are still unclear. Here, we present RPT as a novel strategy to eradicate CTCs while preserving blood cell integrity. Through systematic investigations, we pioneered the application of blue light for CTCs' inactivation and established optimized RPT parameters that achieve complete CTCs' elimination with minimal impact on coagulation, immune cell functionality, and erythrocyte integrity. Mechanistically, RPT triggers mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress, amplifying mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (mtROS) to induce PANoptosis, a coordinated cell death program integrating pyroptosis, apoptosis, necroptosis, and ferroptosis, in CRC cells. Transcriptomic profiling and pharmacological inhibition confirmed mtROS as the central mediator, with antioxidants rescuing PANoptotic markers and restoring cell viability. Unlike conventional therapies, RPT exploits riboflavin's tumor-selective mitochondrial accumulation, ensuring targeted cytotoxicity without compromising blood homeostasis. Overall, this study not only deciphers the mtROS-PANoptosis axis as a therapeutic vulnerability but also establishes RPT as a promising intervention to disrupt metastatic dissemination in CRC.

This case report details a rare and severe instance of neonatal paraquat exposure following maternal ingestion of the herbicide late in pregnancy. A full-term male neonate was delivered at 37+4 weeks after the mother consumed two spoonfuls (approx. 30 mL) of paraquat approximately 24 h before delivery. The newborn presented with immediate respiratory distress, birth asphyxia, meconium aspiration syndrome, and persistent pulmonary hypertension unresponsive to standard therapies. Despite aggressive interventions—including advanced ventilation strategies, inhaled nitric oxide, surfactant therapy, and multiple pharmacological agents—the neonate’s condition deteriorated, complicated by ventilator-associated pneumonia, acute kidney injury, and refractory pulmonary hypertension. The case underscores the diagnostic and therapeutic challenges posed by paraquat toxicity in neonates, particularly given the overlap with common neonatal syndromes and the lack of specific biomarkers for fetal exposure. Literature review reveals that such cases are exceedingly rare and often underreported, especially in India, with outcomes largely dependent on the timing and amount of exposure, promptness of intervention, and severity of maternal toxicity. This report highlights the need for heightened clinical awareness, early diagnosis, and aggressive management, while advocating for preventive public health measures to reduce maternal poisoning and its devastating neonatal consequences.

Diabetic retinopathy (DR) is a serious sight-threatening complication that occurs due to constant hyperglycemia. It is the most common and leading cause of vision impairment worldwide. The development and progression of DR involve a complex network of genetic and environmental factors. Vascular inflammatory pathways, oxidative stress and epigenetic modifications have been linked to the development of diabetic mediated retinopathy. Candidate gene studies have implicated variants in genes involved in glucose metabolism such as (ALR2), vascular regulation (VEGF) are closely associated with DR susceptibility. Hyperglycemia triggers several factors such as polyol pathway, advanced glycation end-products (AGEs) formation, activation of protein kinase C (PKC), dysregulation of the renin-angiotensin system (RAS). These pathways collectively induce oxidative stress, inflammation, vascular dysfunction and pathological angiogenesis that further intensify microvascular lesions resulting in DR pathogenesis. Emerging therapeutic strategies present anti-VEGF agents, PKC inhibitors, and drugs modulating RAS system. In addition, targeted medicine based on genetic risk profiling and novel gene therapy approaches hold great promise in DR treatment. Further research integrating multi-omics data, gene-environment interactions, and precise translational studies are required for improving DR management and associated risk factor.

Abstract Not Available Journal of Current and Advance Medical Research, July 2024;11(2):60-61

Böcek bağışıklık sistemi, humoral ve hücresel bağışıklık olarak iki şekilde çalışır. Humoral savunmalar, antimikrobiyal peptitlerin, oksijen veya nitrojenin reaktif ara maddelerinin ve hemolenfin pıhtılaşmasını veya melanizasyonunu düzenleyen karmaşık enzimatik metabolitlerin üretimini içerir. Hücresel bağışıklık ise fagositoz, nodülasyon ve kapsülleme, pıhtılaşma, dokuların yeniden şekillenmesi gibi hemosit özelindeki temel bağışıklık tepkilerini ifade eder. Böcek bağışıklık sistemi ile ilgili araştırmalar, bu karmaşık ve kompleks sistemin işleyişini anlayabilmek için önemli bulgular elde etmeye devam etmektedir. Böcek hemositlerinin sınıflandırılması da bu sürecin önemli bir parçası olarak karşımıza çıkmaktadır. Bu derlemede, böcek hemositlerinin morfolojik, sitokimyasal ve fonksiyonel özellikleri güncel literatür ışığında değerlendirilmiştir. Çeşitli böcek takımlarında prohemositler, granülositler, plazmatositler, sferülositler ve önositoidler başlıca hücre tipleri olarak tanımlanmıştır. Bazı türlerde bunlara adipohemosit, kristal hücre, lamellosit gibi özel tiplerin eklendiği görülmüştür. Drosophila gibi model organizmalarda hemosit tipleri sınırlı ve farklı terminolojiyle tanımlanırken, Lepidoptera, Diptera, Hemiptera ve Orthoptera gibi takımlarda daha geniş bir çeşitlilik rapor edilmiştir. Ayrıca, tek hücreli RNA dizileme (scRNA-seq) gibi yeni teknolojiler taksonomik sınıflandırmada standartlaşma potansiyeli taşımaktadır. Ancak, türler arası farklılıklar, fizyolojik durum ve deneysel yöntemler nedeniyle hemosit sınıflandırmasında hâlen önemli tutarsızlıklar bulunmaktadır. Böcek hemositlerinin görev ve özelliklerinin net olarak anlaşılması, yalnızca temel entomoloji bilgisine katkı sağlamakla kalmayıp, entegre zararlı yönetimi ve biyokontrol stratejilerinin geliştirilmesi açısından da önem arz etmektedir.

The prevalence of echinococcosis among domestic animals and dogs has been studied. Echinococcosis is a dangerous helminthiasis of humans and animals caused by tapeworms (Echinococcus granulosus). Treatment in humans is only surgical and expensive, and it also causes enormous economic damage to livestock. According to the WHO classification, echinococcosis is included in the list of most common diseases and in many countries is part of national programs for disease elimination. Annual costs for patient treatment and livestock losses are estimated at 3 billion USD. Kazakhstan, including the West Kazakhstan region, is considered unfavorable for echinococcosis in stationary terms. Over the past 8 years, 108 cases of larval echinococcosis were detected in the WKR, of which 11.1% were children under 14 years old.

&lt;p&gt;Preclinical pharmacodynamic evaluation (groups)&lt;/p&gt;

Modern cosmetology and dermatology give hair care a lot of attention since growing public interest in preserving hair health and aesthetic appeal. The constant exposure to environmental pollution, stress, chemical and thermal damage hair suffers from increases the demand for safe, scientifically verified hair care products. The real nature of this research is based on the pressing need for efficient, customized, evidence-based hair care techniques addressing various scalp types and external elements. By means of modern techniques, cosmetic formulations, and scientific guidelines, this study aims to identify the ideal hair care products and practices depending on scalp type and environmental exposure. This systematizes present hair care products, diagnostic tools, and clinical procedures to support individualized treatment plans. Emphasizing scalp classification, the function of active ingredients, the physiological needs of every scalp type (normal, oily, dry, sensitive, combination), and the effect of stress and environmental elements on hair condition. Additionally covered are recent developments including microbiome-centered treatments and deep learning-based scalp diagnostics. The results confirm the need of customized hair care plans, appropriate product selection, and the active participation of cosmetologists and trichologists in offering specific treatment. The study encourages a thorough, multidisciplinary approach combining dermatology, cosmetology, trichology, and psychophysiology to help create safe and efficient hair care solutions fit for contemporary lifestyle and environmental issues.

Introduction: Echinococcosis also known as hydatid disease is an endemic zoonotic disease with an estimate of 2,00,000 new cases per year worldwide. Its primary definitive host is dog and man being an accidental intermediate host. The most common organ affected is liver, brain, and spine. Surgery is the mainstay of treatment and medical management is reserved for selected cases. Our Objective was to retrospectively evaluate the prevalence of craniospinal hydatid cyst disease in southern Rajasthan. Materials and method: A retrospective analysis of all cases of craniospinal hydatid disease managed at our department was done from 2013 to 2021 and data was analysed. Results: A total number of eight cases were reported with an incidence of 1.8% of all craniospinal space-occupying lesions during the study period with a male to female ratio of 3:1, mean age of presentation 18.5 years, four out of eight patients were in paediatrics age group. All cases were managed surgically with preoperative rupture in one case and recurrence in two cases. Albendazole was given to cases only with rupture or recurrence. Conclusions: Craniospinal hydatid disease should be suspected in all non-enhancing cystic brain lesions especially in endemic regions. In all patients, surgical excision should be done preferably with medical management reserved for inaccessible lesions, unfit patients, rupture and recurrent cases only. The study concludes that primary surgery with gross total excision with no or minimal spillage of cyst content intraoperatively has good results with recurrence rate of only 12.5%.

Mental health is a critical aspect of overall well-being, yet it imposes a significant burden on healthcare systems globally. In India, one in eight individuals suffers from mental disorders, with anxiety and depression being the most prevalent. Despite policies emphasizing comprehensive, community-based support, budgetary trends disproportionately prioritize palliative-rehabilitative care over preventive and promotive measures. This article highlights the challenges of translating policy visions into actionable, fundable programs, given that mental health allocations constitute less than 1% of the national budget. It emphasizes the need for strengthening intersectoral collaborations, optimizing resource allocation, and fostering innovative research to evaluate cost-effective interventions. Prioritizing preventive and promotive mental healthcare is essential to address the escalating burden of mental health conditions. Achieving equitable and sustainable mental health outcomes in India requires integrating services and funding across sectors while ensuring robust policy implementation and community-based care.

Pemanfaatan tumbuhan dan bahan alam sebagai obat antibakteri merupakan salah satu alternatif yang diterapkan masyarakat dalam menghadapi peningkatan resistensi terhadap obat kimia. Salah satu tanaman yang berpotensi sebagai antibakteri adalah bit. Tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk mengetahui apakah ekstrak buah bit dapat diformulasikan dalam sediaan lotion, stabilitas sediaan lotion ekstrak buah bit (Beta vulgaris L) dan aktivitas antibakteri sediaan terhadap bakteri Staphylococcus aureus. Buah bit diekstraksi dengan metode perkolasi dan dengan pelarut etanol 70%. Kemudian dilakukan skrining fitokimia untuk memastikan adanya kadungan flavonoid, alkaloid, fenol, tanin, triterpenoid dan saponin. Ekstrak diformulasikan ke dalam sediaan lotion konsentrasi 0,2%, 0,4% dan 0,6%. Sediaan diuji stabilitasnya dengan metode cycling test dengan parameter uji organoleptis, homogenitas, pH, daya sebar, viskositas dan sifat alir. Uji aktivitas antibakteri dari sediaan lotion ekstrak buah bit terhadap bakteri Staphylococcus aureus dengan menggunakan metode difusi cakram. Hasil penelitian menunjukan ekstrak buah bit dapat diformulasikan dalam sediaan lotion. Lotion ekstrak buah bit konsentrasi 0,2% memenuhi stabilitas sediaan pada uji organoleptis, homogenitas, daya sebar, viskositas dan sifat alir; Lotion ekstrak buah bit konsentrasi 0,4% memenuhi stabilitas sediaan pada uji organoleptis, homogenitas dan sifat alir; Lotion ekstrak buah bit konsentrasi 0,6% memenuhi stabilitas sediaan pada uji organoleptis, homogentas, viskositas dan sifat alir. Lotion ekstrak buah bit konsentrasi 0,2%;0,4% dan 0,6% tidak memiliki aktivitas antibakteri terhadap Staphylococcus aureus.

Her ne kadar Anadolu manastırcılığının kurucu figürü olarak Kayzeria’lı Basileus gösterilse de Basileus 350’li yılların sonunda bu faaliyete giriştiğinde manastırcılık epeyce yol almıştı ve kurumsallaşma başlamıştı. Burada en etkin lider ise Basileus’tan 30 yaş kadar büyük olan ve Basileus’un da manevi lideri konumundaki Sebastea piskoposu Eustathius’tu. Eustathius çok belagat sahibi bir hatip değildi; ancak manevi karizması ile Anadolu’da binlerce insanı asketik yaşam sürmeye ikna etti; ibadet, oruç, üretim ve hayır hizmetlerinden oluşan bir program ile manastırları teşkilatlandırdı. Manastırları yerleşim yerlerinden uzak çöllerde ve dağ başlarında konumlandıran Mısır manastır modelinin aksine, Eustathius manastır cemaatlerini Kilise’yle iç içe olacak şekilde şehir ve kasaba merkezlerinde konumlandırdı. Bu özelliklerin çoğu Basilues’un temsil ettiği şekilde Ortodoks Bizans manastırcılığına mal oldu. Kilise tarihçisi Sozomon’e göre Anadolu’daki manastırcılığın asıl kurucusu Eustathius idi; hatta Basileus’un asketik yazılarının müellifi de oydu. İkili kariyerlerinin büyük kısmında birlikte hareket ettiler. İkisi de Aryüsçülük tartışmasında Anadolu’daki piskoposların çoğunun görüşü olan benzer özcü (homoiousius) piskoposlarla hareket etti. Bu grup İznikçi “aynı özcü” (homoousius) görüş ile Aryüs’ü takip eden Baba ile Oğul arasındaki ayrışmayı vurgulayan “benzemez özcü” (anomean) görüşleri arasında orta yolu takip ediyordu. Eustathius, Konstantinopol’lü Macedonius, Ancyralı Basileus ile birlikte bu grubun en önemli liderlerinden biriydi. Söz konusu grup aynı zamanda hem teorik hem pratik bakımdan Anadolu manastırcılığının temellerini atmıştır. Eustathius’un temsil ettiği asketizm anlayışının aşırılıkları 350’li yıllarda gerçekleşen Gangra (Çankırı) sinodunda mahkûm edilip yasaklanmıştır. Ancak buna rağmen Eustathius Sebasta piskoposu olarak devam etmiştir. Bu eleştirilen asketik uygulamaların bir kısmının devam ettirildiği sanılmaktadır. Basileus da her iki cephede onu takip ederek onunla birlikte hareket etti. Ancak 373 yılında Basileus, kardeşi Nyssa’lı Gregorius ve en yakın dostu Nazianzus’lu Gregorius ile birlikte, aynı özcü (homoousius) Neo-İznikçi pozisyonun liderliğini üstlendi. Bu ayrışmadan sonra Basileus ve arkadaşları Eustathius’a cephe alarak onu sansürlediler; onun daha önce kendileriyle olan tüm ilişkilerini yok saydılar. Ancak Basileus’un kurucusu sayıldığı Bizans manastırcılığının ayırıcı özelliklerinin fikir babası Eustathius’tur ve bu özelliği ile daha derin tarihsel araştırmaları hak eder. Bu makalenin konusu kaynaklardaki bilgiler ve modern çalışmalardan yola çıkarak bu önemli şahsiyetin hayatını, asketik görüşlerini ve doktrinel duruşunu ortaya koymaktır.

Neoadjuvant ICI therapy for dMMR LARC produced cCRs in at least half of patients. These real-world data support the feasibility of nonoperative management, but the observed heterogeneity in clinical response highlights the need to optimize patient selection and monitoring strategies.

Abstract Background Sensitive outcome measures are critical for evaluating the efficacy of novel treatments for Parkinson disease (PD). Recently, we demonstrated that a tremor detection algorithm could reliably detect and quantify real-life PD tremor from wearable sensor data. Here, we assess the sensitivity to change of sensor-derived daily-life tremor measures over two years in an unmedicated and medicated cohort of persons with early PD. Methods We used two-year continuous wrist sensor data (median wear time: 22 hours/day) from the Personalized Parkinson Project (n=462 medicated; n=78 unmedicated at baseline), in combination with annual clinical evaluations of tremor severity. From the raw gyroscope data, we derived previously validated weekly measures for tremor time and power, which were smoothed over time using piecewise linear trend estimation. One- and two-year standardized response means (SRMs) were computed to compare the sensitivity to change between the sensor-derived tremor measures and clinical tremor scores. Findings In unmedicated participants with tremor, sensor-derived tremor measures demonstrated a high sensitivity to progression (two-year SRMs ranged from 0.67 to 1.09), which was significantly larger than clinical tremor scores (two-year SRMs ranged from 0.21 to 0.41). In medicated participants, sensor-derived tremor time decreased (two-year SRM of -0.18 in participants with tremor), which was associated with both an increase in dopaminergic medication dose and higher disease duration. In contrast, the sensor-derived tremor power measures and clinical rest tremor scores (measured in the OFF state) increased slightly (two-year SRMs ranging from 0.11 to 0.27). Interpretation Prior to initiation of symptomatic treatment, sensor-derived daily-life tremor measures are substantially more sensitive to disease progression than clinical tremor scores, making them a promising tool to evaluate the efficacy of disease-modifying treatments in early PD.

NCT05653050.

Persistent facial and oral discomfort, particularly trigeminal neuralgia (TN), is frequently accompanied by anxiety, which has been closely linked to increased excitability of neurons in the lateral habenula (LHb). However, the mechanisms underlying this hyperexcitability remain unclear. Here, we show that partial transection of the infraorbital nerve (pT-ION) significantly upregulated the expression of transient receptor potential canonical 6 (TRPC6), β isoform of calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (βCaMKII), phosphorylated extracellular regulated kinase (p-ERK), and phosphorylated cyclic adenosine monophosphate response element-binding protein (p-CREB) in the LHb. Pharmacological blockade of either TRPC6 or βCaMKII effectively reversed pT-ION-induced mechanical hypersensitivity and anxiety-like behaviors. TRPC6 overexpression in the LHb reproduced the behavioral and electrophysiological phenotypes observed in pT-ION mice, including increased LHb neuronal excitability. In contrast, bilateral knockdown of TRPC6 attenuated both pain- and anxiety-like behaviors and normalized neuronal activity in the LHb. Our study identified TRPC6 as a key mediator of LHb neuronal hyperexcitability, contributing to trigeminal neuralgia-associated pain and anxiety via the βCaMKII/ERK/CREB pathway, and suggests its potential as a target for treatment.

Depression in cancer patients remains a significant challenge, with multifactorial origins encompassing psychological, biological, and social determinants. Recent research has highlighted the role of the gut microbiome, particularly fungal dysbiosis driven by Candida overgrowth, as a contributor to inflammation and neuropsychiatric symptoms in oncology. The present hypothesis proposes that targeted probiotic supplementation could mitigate Candida-driven dysbiosis, reduce systemic and neuroinflammation, and thereby alleviate depressive symptoms in cancer patients. This manuscript reviews the existing evidence for the gut-brain-immune axis in cancer-related depression, distinguishes the unique role of Candida among gut microbiota alterations, evaluates current antifungal and probiotic interventions, discusses safety considerations in immunocompromised populations, and outlines research pathways for clinical translation, including candidate probiotic strains and the use of biomarkers for personalized therapy. Rigorous clinical trials are required to validate efficacy, safety, and optimal implementation strategies. If proven, microbiome-targeted approaches could complement current standards, addressing the complex biopsychosocial needs of cancer patients.

Culture-negative infective endocarditis is difficult to diagnose because it often presents with vague symptoms, delaying recognition and worsening outcomes. Renal infarction is rare but may be the first clue. A previously healthy 32-yearold woman had intermittent fever for six weeks and sudden right-sided flank pain for two days. Examination revealed a holosystolic murmur and right costovertebral angle tenderness. Investigations showed raised inflammatory markers and a positive rheumatoid factor, while repeated blood cultures were negative. Echocardiography showed severe mitral regurgitation without visiblevegetations, and computed tomography angiography confirmed right renal infarction. Using modified Duke criteria, the diagnosis was made and empiric intravenous vancomycin and ceftriaxone were started. Despite intensive care and aggressive therapy, she deteriorated and died from refractory heart failure due to severe valvular dysfunction. This case shows the disease can be insidious even in low-risk patients, stressing early suspicion, multidisciplinary care, and timely surgical evaluation when appropriate.

Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), target global pada tahun 2030 ialah untuk dapat menekan angka kematian ibu (AKI) menjadi 70 per 100.000 kelahiran hidup. Penyebab terjadinya perdarahan pada trimester pertama dan juga trisemester kedua kehamilan salah satunya ialah abortus. Beberapa faktor cenderung mengarah pada terminasi dini, misalnya faktor janin, faktor ibu, faktor maternal, faktor umur, faktor lingkungan, faktor pekerjaan dan riwayat pengangkatan janin. Tujuan penelitian ini untuk mengetahui hubungan antara usia ibu, riwayat abortus dan jarak kehamilan dengan kejadian abortus inkomplit di Klinik Purnama Medical Center Kabupaten Musi Banyuasin Pada Tahun 2023. Desain penelitian menggunakan survey analitik dengan pendekatan cross sectional. Populasi dalam penelitian ini adalah semua ibu hamil rawat inap yang tercatat dalam buku register di Klinik Purnama Medical Center tahun 2023 yangberjumlah 57 ibu hamil. Teknik pengambilan sampel pada penelitian ini dilakukan dengan cara total sampling dengan jumlah sampel sebanyak 57 responden. Pengumpulan data menggunakan lembar checklist. Analisa data menggunakan analisa univariat dan analisa bivariat dengan menggunakan uji chi square. Hasil penelitian ada hubungan umur ibu (p value =0,020), riwayat abortus (p value =0,026) dan jarak kehamilan (p value =0,015) dengan kejadian abortus inkomplit di Klinik Purnama Medical Center Kabupatrn Musi Banyuasin Tahun 2023. Diharapkan dari hasil penelitian ini dapat menjadi gambaran bagi pihak klinik untuk dapat lebih meningkatkan pelayanan kesehatan terutama menangani kejadian abortus inkomplit.

Fibroblast-like cells (FLCs) exist in the smooth muscle layers of visceral organs, yet in many instances their functional role(s) have not been identified. FLCs express platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR) α and are a novel class of excitable cells recently described in visceral organs. Crenolanib is a benzamidine quinolone derivative originally developed as an inhibitor of PDGFR to treat certain solid tumors with PDGFRα over-expression mutations. In the present study we used crenolanib to disrupt PDGFRα expression and signaling in the GI tracts of BALB/c mice. Intra-peritoneal injections of crenolanib (100 μg/g body weight) or DMSO control vehicle were given to littermates from postpartum P1 through P15. Crenolanib injected mice were smaller in size and weight. The gastrointestinal tracts were also shorter and appeared partially distended. qPCR revealed down-regulation of key gene transcripts involved in PDGFRα cell signaling including Pdgfrα, Kcnn3 and P2ry1. Confocal immunofluorescence demonstrated significant decreases in PDGFRα and SK3 protein expression. c-Kit expression was slightly inhibited but gastric, intestinal and colonic pacemaker activity was not affected by crenolanib. Purinergic inhibitory post-junctional motor responses were greatly attenuated in the GI tracts of crenolanib treated animals compared to vehicle treated controls in response to electric field evoked nerve stimulation. These data provide evidence for a functional role of PDGFRα + cells in inhibitory neuroeffector motor responses throughout the gastrointestinal tract.

Introducción: La Enfermedad de Still del Adulto (ESA) es una patología autoinflamatoria sistémica poco frecuente y de etiología desconocida que, al presentarse durante el embarazo, supone un reto clínico por el riesgo de complicaciones obstétricas y sistémicas. Objetivo: Describir el curso clínico, el abordaje diagnóstico y el manejo multidisciplinario de una gestante con ESA, resaltando las implicaciones maternas y perinatales. Metodología: Se realizó un estudio cualitativo, descriptivo, tipo reporte de caso único, con análisis retrospectivo de la historia clínica electrónica siguiendo la guía CARE, garantizando confidencialidad y consentimiento informado. Discusión: La ESA en la gestación plantea retos diagnósticos por su similitud con entidades obstétricas graves; en este caso, la paciente con antecedentes de enfermedad inflamatoria sistémica y anemia hemolítica autoinmune evolucionó favorablemente bajo manejo especializado y seguimiento multidisciplinario, lo que permitió vigilancia estrecha del binomio materno-fetal y un desenlace neonatal positivo pese a parto pretérmino y ruptura prematura de membranas. Conclusión: La ESA durante el embarazo exige un alto índice de sospecha, diagnóstico oportuno y manejo interdisciplinario; la individualización terapéutica y la vigilancia continua son esenciales para disminuir la morbimortalidad materna y fetal.

The inhibition of fibrosis in filtering blebs is indispensable for lowering intraocular pressure (IOP) after PRESERFLO MicroShunt surgery (PMS). We previously reported the anti-fibrotic effect of OBP-801 (OBP) on a filtering bleb in a rabbit glaucoma filtration surgery model using a 22-gauge cannula. In this study, we investigated the effect of OBP after PMS in rabbit eyes for the development of a new practically applicable anti-fibrotic treatment. This study involved 19 Japanese white rabbits that underwent PMS in the right eye, with those eyes divided into 3 groups: (1) intraoperative subconjunctival injection of 0.02% mitomycin-C (MMC) (n = 6), (2) postoperative instillation of 100 nM OBP eye drops (n = 7), or (3) a balanced salt solution (BSS) control (n = 6). Bleb morphology and IOP were monitored for 12 weeks postoperative, with the bleb tissues then undergoing evaluation of fibrosis and Western blot analysis. A lower postoperative IOP was maintained in the OBP-group eyes, and at 12 weeks postoperative, the IOP was significantly lower in that group than in the BSS and MMC groups (p < 0.01). OBP-treated eyes showed no adverse effects and reduced levels of alpha-smooth muscle actin and collagen deposition, thus suggesting that OBP is a promising candidate for improving surgical outcomes post PMS.

Cognitive impairment, postural control and gait deficits are common manifestations of multiple sclerosis that significantly impact patients' quality of life and daily functioning. The integration of the sensory, motor and cognitive systems are necessary to ensure postural control. Increasing amounts of evidence suggest that postural control consumes attention sources. Central motor, central sensory and cognitive disorders can affect the planning and preservation of postural control, and reduce the problem-solving abilities during walking. This can result in slower gait, shortened single support time, and delayed swing phase because of postural control impairment. However, much less is known about the effects of cognitive burden on postural control and gait in multiple sclerosis patients. The aim of the study was to understand the relationships between cognition and postural control and to explain their importance for effective multiple sclerosis management. Future research in cognition and balance in multiple sclerosis should prioritize longitudinal studies, develop targeted interventions, and utilize advanced neuroimaging techniques. These approaches will contribute to a better understanding of the disease progression, the development of more effective treatments, and improved monitoring of rehabilitation outcomes in multiple sclerosis patients.

The aim of this study was to determine the spiritual well-being levels of older adults with chronic diseases and the factors affecting their sense of well-being. The population of the study consisted of 156 older adults living in a nursing home in Turkey. The Older Adults Information Form, the Care Dependency Scale and the Spiritual Well-Being Scale were used to collect the data, while the independent samples t test and correlation tests were employed to analyze the data. The older adults’ mean score for the Care Dependency Scale was 4.67±0.68, while their mean score for the Spiritual Well-Being Scale was 116.74±14.24. There was no statistically significant difference in the scores for the Care Dependency Scale and the total Spiritual Well-Being Scale according to age group, but a significant difference was found in the anomie subdimension. Overall, the spiritual well-being levels of the older adults with chronic disease were found to be good.

Hassas Arıcılık, geleneksel arıcılığın sınırlarının ötesine geçerek, arı popülasyonlarındaki küresel düşüşe teknoloji tabanlı bir çözüm sunan veri odaklı bir yönetim stratejisidir. Ana amacı, kaynak tüketimini en aza indirerek arı sağlığı ve üretkenliğini en üst düzeye çıkarmak için her koloniyi invaziv olmayan yöntemlerle sürekli olarak izlemektir. Hassas Arıcılıkda veri toplama üç düzeyde yapılandırılmıştır: Arılık düzeyindeki parametreler (örneğin, meteorolojik ve çevresel video izleme), Koloni düzeyindeki parametreler (örneğin, sıcaklık, ağırlık, nem, ses/titreşim, gazlar ve kızılötesi görüntüleme) ve Bireysel arı parametreleri (örneğin, giriş/çıkış sayıları ve davranış takibi). Akıllı Kovan Sistemlerinin entegrasyonu, Yapay Zeka (AI) ve Makine Öğrenmesi (ML) algoritmalarına veri beslemek için IoT sensörlerini kullanmaktadır. Bu gelişmiş analizler, arıcıların oğul verme eğilimleri, ana arı varlığı, bal verimi ve Varroa destructor gibi zararlıların erken tespiti konusunda erken uyarılar ve yüksek doğruluklu tahminler (%99'a kadar) almalarını sağlamaktadır. Sonuç olarak, Hassas Arıcılık, arıcılık uygulamalarını daha verimli ve önleyici hale getirerek küresel gıda güvenliğinde hayati bir rol oynayan arı kolonilerinin sürdürülebilirliğini sağlamayı amaçlamaktadır.

Bu makale, metin oluşturma özelliğiyle öne çıkan ChatGPT üretken yapay zekâ modelinin “mukâren (mukâyeseli) fıkıh literatürü” üzerine yapılan literatür tarama süreçlerindeki performansını değerlendirmeyi amaçlamaktadır. Çalışmada, ChatGPT’ye dört Sünnî fıkıh mezhebi olan Hanefî, Mâlikî, Şâfiî ve Hanbelî mezheplerinin mukâren fıkıh literatürünü listelemesi için ayrı ayrı komutlar verilmiş; modelin aktardığı eserlerin “doğruluk”, “kapsamlılık” ve “ilgili mezhebe uyumluluk” kriterleri açısından değerlendirilmesi yapılmıştır. Böylelikle, ChatGPT’nin literatür taramalarında etkin ve güvenilir bir araç olup olamayacağı tartışmaya açılarak, literatür taramalarında yapay zekânın daha etkili kullanımına dikkat çekmek hedeflenmektedir. Bu bağlamda, özellikle ChatGPT modeli başta olmak üzere yapay zekâ tabanlı uygulamalar aracılığıyla literatür taraması yapmayı planlayan araştırmacıların yapay zekâ okuryazarlıklarının geliştirilmesine katkı sunulması ve bu süreçte dikkat edilmesi gereken inceliklerin ortaya konulması amaçlanmaktadır. Diğer yandan, ChatGPT uygulamasının temel bilgi kaynaklarına hızlı ve kolay erişim sağlaması nedeniyle yararlı bir uygulama olduğu kabul edilse de hatalı, eksik veya gerçek dışı bilgiler ürettiği göz ardı edilmemelidir. Dolayısıyla bu tür yapay zekâ uygulamaların çıktılarının denetlenmeden gerçek ve kusursuz bilgiymiş gibi kullanılması, bilimsel etik açısından ciddi riskler barındırmaktadır. Nitekim ChatGPT uygulamasına yaptırılan bu literatür taramasında, uygulamanın birden fazla uydurma eser ve yazar ismi verdiği, bazı eserleri yanlış yazarlarla ilişkilendirdiği, kimi eser isimlerini eksik aktardığı tespit edilmiştir. Ayrıca uygulamanın, dört mezhep literatürü açısından son derece önemli ve temel kaynak kabul edilen birçok klasik esere yer vermediği veya yer verdiği bazı eserleri yetersiz ve eksik bir biçimde sunduğu gözlemlenmiştir. Bu durum, ChatGPT’nin mukâren fıkıh literatürünün erken dönem kaynaklarına ulaşmada güçlük yaşadığını ve bunun modelin performansını olumsuz etkilediğini göstermektedir. Modelin eksikliklerinden biri, araştırmacının yanlış veya eksik bilgi içeren çıktılara yönelik düzeltme taleplerine karşılık, uygulamanın çoğu zaman çelişkili yanıtlar vermesi ya da önceki hatasında ısrar etmesidir. Bu durum, modelin kendi çıktıları üzerindeki eleştiriye yanıt verme kapasitesinin sınırlı olduğunu ve bu sınırlılığın akademik araştırmalar açısından güven sorunlarına yol açabileceğini göstermektedir. Diğer taraftan uygulamanın kendisine yöneltilen mükerrer komutlar sayesinde ürettiği bazı verileri tashih ettiği veyahut bazen konuyla ilgili bir fikrinin olmadığını beyan ettiğini aktarmakta fayda vardır. Öte yandan, modelin bazen dilsel yetersizliği gibi ayrı bir sorun alanı daha olduğu ifade edilebilir. Nitekim literatür taramasına dair aktardığı cevaplarda zaman zaman cümle düşüklükleri, anlatım bozuklukları ve özellikle de imlada tutarsızlık gibi hatalar dikkat çekmektedir. Bu durum, ChatGPT’nin ürettiği metinlerin doğrudan akademik yazım normlarına uygun olmadığını ve içerik denetimi kadar dilsel ve biçimsel bir kontrolün de gerekli olduğunu göstermektedir. ChatGPT uygulamasına yaptırılan bu taramada göze çarpan söz konusu olumsuz hususlardan yola çıkarak, ilgili yapay zekâ modeli ile gerçekleştirilen literatür taramalarında insan faktörünün mutlaka devrede olması gerektiğini ve üretilen yanıtların ehil kişiler tarafından eleştirel bir süzgeçten geçirilmesini zorunlu kılmaktadır. Son olarak, bilgi üretiminin tamamen yapay zekâya havale edilmesi durumunda, araştırmacının analitik düşünme ve değerlendirme becerilerinde zayıflama riski doğabileceği unutulmamalıdır. Böylece, araştırmacıların yapay zekâ okuryazarlığı düzeylerinin artırılması, model çıktılarının titizlikle denetlenmesi ve akademik ciddiyetin elden bırakılmaması büyük önem arz etmektedir. Aksi takdirde, yapay zekâ modelleri aracılığıyla elde edilen verilerle hazırlanan çalışmaların bilimsel geçerliliği sorgulanabilir hâle gelebilir ve bu durum akademik bilgi üretiminde kalitenin düşmesine neden olabilir. Bu nedenle, yapay zekâ destekli literatür taramalarında hem teknolojik gelişmelerin hem de bilimsel etik sorumlulukların dengeli bir şekilde yürütülmesi gerekmektedir.

Bu çalışma, klasik Arap şiirinde naat türünün çağdaş yorumlarını inceleyerek Abdullah Şemseddin’e ait Efrâhu’n-Nûr adlı kasidenin biçimsel ve tematik düzlemde derinlemesine analizini amaçlamaktadır. Araştırmanın temel problemi, klasik kaside formu ile modern şiir anlayışının naat geleneğinde nasıl bir araya getirilebileceği ve bunun edebi, tasavvufi ve metafizik boyutlarda nasıl yansıma bulduğudur. Çalışmada nitel bir yöntem benimsenmiş; metin, geleneksel Arap edebi tenkit usulleriyle analiz edilmiştir. Aruz vezni, nazım yapısı, mecazlar, istiareler, tevhid teması, ilahi aşk ve insanî acziyet gibi başlıca edebi ve tasavvufi unsurlar mercek altına alınmıştır. Ayrıca, şairin Hz. Peygamber’e duyduğu sevgiyi “Nûr-i Muhammedî” metaforu üzerinden nasıl ifade ettiği; klasik ve modern söylemin nasıl bütünleştirildiği incelenmiştir. Bu çalışmanın literatüre katkısı, klasik naat örnekleriyle karşılaştırmalı bir analiz sunarak Abdullah Şemseddin’in eserinde şekillenen özgün üslubu ve anlam evrenini ortaya koymaktır. Sonuç olarak Efrâhu’n-Nûr, klasik naat mirasına yaslanan ama onu yeniden yorumlayan modern bir naat örneği olarak değerlendirilmektedir.

Background: Hypocalcaemia is an ordinary issue that may present after a thyroidectomy; nevertheless, it's not as widely known that it may flare up later because of an underlying illness. Specifically, this report addresses how multiple viral infections might contribute to catastrophically low calcium levels in a vulnerable patient. Case Presentation: In November 2024, a 62-year-old woman with a past of a total thyroidectomy three years preceding that was complicated by an unintentional parathyroidectomy and protracted hypoparathyroidism proceeded to the emergency room with acute hypocalcemic tetany. Before she turned hospitalised, she had two infections in a sequence: a severe respiratory virus and an entirely new confirmed SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) infection. She had been consistent on a set regimen of calcium and calcitriol previously. Intervention: The patient received medical treatment shortly thereafter with calcium gluconate infused through an IV, which interrupted the tetany. subsequent to that, her long-term therapy schedule was amended to include a higher dose of calcitriol and calcium. Outcomes: The patient's serum calcium levels reverted approximately normal, and she was transported residence with a new, stabilised medication approach. Conclusion: This case demonstrates how individuals who have had a thyroidectomy who currently have chronic hypoparathyroidism do not possess an abundance of metabolic balance. Hypocalcaemia can be life-threatening when it develops by systemic stressors, especially multiple viral infections. It highlights how important it is to instruct patients how to manage their days off and to implement temporary dose adjustments when they have more than one infection intercurrent illnesses.

Enfeksiyon hastalıklarında tedavi için rasyonel antibiyotik seçimi, antimikrobiyal direncin önlenmesinde önemli bir basamaktır. Bu çalışmada idrar kültürü yapılamayan bir ilçe merkezi hastanesinde idrar yolu enfeksiyonları (İYE) için ampirik antibiyotik reçeteleme uygulamaları değerlendirilmiş ve klinik kılavuzlara uyum düzeyi ve hasta demografisine göre farklılıklar incelenmiştir. T.C. Sağlık Bakanlığı 19 Mayıs İlçe Devlet Hastanesi’nde 01.08.2022–30.10.2022 tarihleri arasında İYE tanısı alan 370 hastanın verileri retrospektif olarak incelendi. Dâhil edilme kriterleri olarak ICD-10 kodları ile doğrulanmış İYE tanısı ve antibiyotik reçetesi bulunması belirlendi. Tekrarlayan İYE öyküsü olan, klinik olarak piyelonefrit düşünülen hastalar veya başka bir enfeksiyon nedeniyle antibiyotik kullanan hastalar dışlandı. Veriler hasta kayıt sisteminden elde edildi. Analizler SPSS (Statistical Package for the Social Sciences) 25.0 programı ile yapıldı. Kategorik değişkenler için ki-kare testi, yaş gruplarına göre antibiyotik seçimi için lojistik regresyon analizi uygulandı. Florokinolonlar (örn. siprofloksasin) ve üçüncü nesil sefalosporinler (sefiksim, sefpodoksim, sefdinir ve parenteral uygulanan seftriakson) geniş spektrumlu antibiyotikler olarak sınıflandırıldı Hastaların %88.9’u kadın, %11.1’i erkekti. Ortalama yaş 46.0±22.9 idi. Pediatrik grup 50 hasta (%13.5), erişkin grup 320 hasta (%86.5) idi. Başvurular en sık acil servisten (%39.2) yapıldı. En sık reçete edilen antibiyotik fosfomisin (%62.5) idi; bunu nitrofurantoin (%29.6) ve siprofloksasin (%26.6) izledi. Pediatrik hastalarda amoksisilin-klavulanat (%33.3) ve sefuroksim aksetil (%33.3) öne çıktı. Erişkinlerde fosfomisin (%62.5) ve siprofloksasin (%26.6) baskındı. Yaşlı hastalarda (≥65 yaş) geniş spektrumlu antibiyotik kullanımının artışı istatistiksel olarak anlamlı bulundu (p

&lt;p&gt;Small-sided games (SSGs) are widely used in basketball, yet the specific recovery demands imposed by different SSG formats remain unclear. Therefore, the aim of this study was to compare acute and short-term physiological and neuromuscular responses following scoring-oriented SSG using baskets (SSGbasket), possession-oriented (SSGpossession), and a control condition with no SSGs conducted (CON). Thirty-six trained basketball players completed all three conditions in a randomized crossover repeated-measures design. Salivary creatine kinase (CK), pressure pain threshold (PPT), visual analogue scale (VAS) soreness, and reactive strength index (RSI) were assessed at baseline, post, 24 h, and 48 h. There were significant condition × time interactions for CK (p &amp;lt; 0.001), PPT (p &amp;lt; 0.001), VAS (p &amp;lt; 0.001), and RSI (p &amp;lt; 0.001). CK increased most in SSGbasket, exceeding SSGpossession and CON at 24 h and 48 h (all p &amp;lt; 0.001). PPT decreased significantly at all post-exercise time points in SSGbasket and SSGpossession compared with CON (all p &amp;lt; 0.01), with SSGbasket showing the lowest values at 24 h (p &amp;lt; 0.001). VAS soreness was substantially higher in SSGbasket vs. the other conditions immediately post, at 24 h, and at 48 h (all p &amp;lt; 0.001). RSI decreased significantly from baseline in all formats (p &amp;lt; 0.001), but impairments were largest and most prolonged after SSGbasket compared with SSGpossession and CON (all p &amp;lt; 0.001). In conclusion, scoring-oriented SSGbasket elicits larger changes in salivary CK, soreness, and neuromuscular function than possession-oriented SSGbasket or the control training day used in this protocol, requiring careful scheduling within the basketball microcycle.&lt;/p&gt;

Nursing care that aims to improve quality of life requires a holistic and human-centered approach. Katharine Kolcaba’s Comfort Theory supports this perspective by placing comfort as the core of nursing care, encompassing physical, psycho-spiritual, social, and environmental dimensions. This literature review explores the philosophical foundation, application, and outcomes of Comfort Theory across various nursing settings. A literature review was conducted using PubMed, ScienceDirect, and Google Scholar, including publications from 2015–2024 in the form of research articles, books, and policy documents. The selected literature was analyzed using thematic analysis to identify recurring themes related to the application, benefits, and challenges of Comfort Theory in nursing practice. The findings indicate that Comfort Theory supports patient-centered nursing interventions, such as postoperative music therapy, spiritual support for terminal patients, peer support for individuals with chronic illness, and improvements in the hospital environment. Several studies reported increased patient satisfaction, reduced anxiety, and shorter hospital stays. Identified challenges included limited nursing time, cultural differences, and insufficient training. Despite existing barriers, effective leadership, supportive institutional policies, and continuous education were found to facilitate successful implementation of Comfort Theory. Overall, the theory demonstrates strong relevance in contemporary nursing practice by promoting holistic comfort and contributing to improved patient quality of life.

Problem considered: Lymphatic filariasis (LF) remains a significant public health issue in Indonesia despite global progress and national elimination efforts. This study aimed to comprehensively assess the influence of socioeconomic characteristics, preventive behaviors, and housing environmental factors on the risk of LF among Indonesian adults. Methods: This cross-sectional study used the 2023 Indonesia Health Survey to examine associations between socioeconomic factors, protective behaviors, housing characteristics, and lymphatic filariasis (LF) among 570,618 adults. Associations with LF were analyzed using multivariable logistic regression, with results reported as adjusted odds ratios (AORs) and 95 % confidence intervals. Results: The prevalence of LF was 0.14 %. Socio-demographic characteristics (age, sex, education, wealth index, and residence) were not statistically associated with LF risk. However, regular use of mosquito repellents (sprays, coils, electric devices) was significantly associated with a 25 % reduction in LF risk (AOR 0.75, 95 % CI: 0.59–0.95). Living in houses with non-permanent roofing (AOR 1.49, 95 % CI: 0.97–2.28) and without ceilings (AOR 1.20, 95 % CI: 0.93–1.54) showed increased, though non-significant, odds of LF occurrence. Conclusion: LF risk in Indonesia is not distinguished by socioeconomic status but is more strongly determined by consistent adoption of protective behaviors and housing quality. Universal access to mosquito repellents and targeted improvement in housing infrastructure should be prioritized as equitable and effective LF control strategies.

Dental micro-aesthetic traits are linked to gender-specific features in dentistry, but their reliability for gender identification remains controversial. Objectives: To assess the correlation between accurate gender identification and micro-aesthetic dental traits through the evaluation of frontal intraoral photographs by observers, specifically dental undergraduates, graduates, and postgraduates. Methods: A cross-sectional study was conducted at Lahore Medical and Dental College (June 2024 to May 2025) with 376 participants (99% response rate). Participants evaluated 10 anonymous frontal intraoral photographs for gender identification via a questionnaire. Descriptive statistics, chi-square tests, and logistic regression analyzed associations between accuracy and clinical experience (&gt;3 vs. ≤3 years), using SPSS version 25.0. Photographs were selected for variability in micro-aesthetic traits. Result: The mean accuracy score was 5.38 ± 1.72 out of 10, with 58.8% scoring 4–6. Accuracy varied significantly (23.94% for Q8 to 70.21% for Q3, p&lt;0.05). Males had higher accuracy of achieving correct answers (p=0.033), indicating that males were more likely to score above the median score of 5. Experienced clinicians prioritized tooth size (p=0.005) and triangular canines (p=0.017). Logistic regression showed experience-based differences in the correct identification of specific female photographs (OR = 0.564 for Q7, p=0.033; OR = 2.583 for Q9, p&lt;0.001). Conclusions: Dental micro-aesthetic traits provide only moderate accuracy for gender identification due to considerable overlap and observer bias. Targeted education on trait variability is recommended.

Abstract Background Online training programs offer accessible, cost-effective solutions to disseminate evidence-based interventions. Yet, online training is typically insufficient without additional clinical case consultation (CCC). This is particularly salient in adolescent eating disorders treatment, where clinical demand far outstrips capacities of providers trained in evidence-based treatment approaches. This study seeks to better understand attitudes and barriers to receiving CCC among private practice clinicians treating adolescent eating disorders. Methods Licensed private practice clinicians ( n = 47; 100% female, average age 36 y old; 75% master’s degree; average of 4y experience) across the United States enrolled in a randomized trial offering online training (webinar or e-learning) in family-based treatment (FBT) for anorexia nervosa. Post online training, participants were asked before and after 12 sessions of expert CCC to self-report attitudes and barriers to obtaining CCC. Results Prior to CCC, participants rated expert CCC in learning FBT as important/very important (100%). The majority participated in CCC since licensure (82%) and in the last year (68%), rating it valuable or very valuable (77%). Participants predicted that CCC would be valuable (96%) and an important motivation in completing the training study (96%). After CCC, participants viewed CCC as important/very important in learning FBT (94%). Common obstacles included finding a study-eligible patient (44%), scheduling constraints (19%), lost wages (16%), mismatch with consultant (3%), and hesitation to discuss cases (3%). Conclusions Clinicians reported favorable perspectives on CCC in complimenting learning FBT via online training. Future studies are needed to determine methods to deliver, assess, and scale CCC to enhance treatment fidelity.

Purpose: This study assessed the neuromodulatory effect of transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) in internet gaming disorder (IGD), using source-level electroencephalography (EEG) to measure functional connectivity within the default mode network (DMN) and reward/salience network (RSN).Methods: Thirty-one patients with IGD participated in the study. After excluding five dropouts, 26 individuals (tDCS group n= 14; sham group n= 12) completed 10 sessions of either tDCS or sham stimulation. Resting-state EEG, IGD severity, and craving were measured before and 1 month after the intervention. Changes in connectivity within the DMN and RSN were assessed at each frequency band. &lt;i&gt;Post hoc&lt;/i&gt; analysis was used to investigate the correlation between tDCS-induced connectivity changes and clinical improvement.Results: In the DMN, tDCS decreased delta and theta connectivity, and suppressed the increase in beta connectivity. Neural connections between the prefrontal cortex and parietal lobe were the main regions affected. In the RSN, tDCS increased neural connectivity in the theta and beta bands. The connections between the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and cingulate cortex were the main regions affected. &lt;i&gt;Post hoc&lt;/i&gt; analysis revealed a significant correlation between changes in right DLPFC connectivity and reduced craving.Conclusion: tDCS induces neural connectivity changes in the DMN and RSN. These findings support the potential use of tDCS as a neuromodulatory treatment for IGD, particularly in individuals with altered DLPFC connectivity patterns.

This article presents the clinical stages and radiographs of direct pulp capping applications using MTA, a popular material in recent years, in four distinct cases. With the exception of the eight-year-old female patient who presented with trauma complaints in the first case, the other three cases were patients who sought clinical attention due to temperature sensitivity. Following initial radiographic examination, intraoral assessments were conducted. Subsequently, deep caries in the examined teeth were removed, and Mineral Trioxide Aggregate (MTA) was applied to the near-pulpal region. This case report demonstrates that successful pulp capping treatments can allow teeth to remain vital and functional without necessitating root canal therapy.

Abstract Objective To assess the prevalence of auditory symptoms among recreational and professional musicians. Data Sources CINAHL, Cochrane Library, PubMed, and SCOPUS were searched for English‐language studies published from inception through November 19, 2024. Review Methods We included cohort and cross‐sectional studies reporting auditory symptom prevalence among recreational or professional musicians at least 18 years old. Studies involving children or noise exposure data only were excluded. Data were extracted independently by two authors, with disagreements resolved by discussion. Risk of bias was assessed using the Risk Of Bias In Nonrandomized Studies ‐ of Exposure for prospective cohort studies, the Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI) checklist for retrospective cohort and cross‐sectional studies, and the Risk of Bias 2 tool for randomized controlled trials. Primary outcome measures included continuous measures (mean) and proportions (%) with 95% confidence intervals. Results Sixty‐seven studies (n = 28,311) on auditory symptoms among musicians were included. The mean age was 34.7 years for the musicians and 30.2 years for the control group. Musicians experienced a significantly higher prevalence of tinnitus (42.6% vs 13.2%), hearing loss (25.7% vs 11.6%), and hyperacusis (37.3% vs 15.3%) compared to the control population. However, there was no significant difference in the prevalence of hearing loss, hyperacusis, and tinnitus between classical and pop/rock musicians. Conclusion At least one in three musicians reports tinnitus or hyperacusis, while approximately one in four has hearing loss. This evidence suggests otolaryngologists treating musicians should consider routine auditory assessments and preventive counseling.

Koyunlarda yaş, vücut ölçüleri üzerinde önemli ve belirleyici bir biyometrik faktör olarak öne çıkmaktadır. Bireylerin yaş ilerledikçe artan somatik gelişimi, canlı ağırlık ve temel vücut ölçüleri üzerinde doğrusal olmayan fakat istatistiksel olarak anlamlı bir etki oluşturmaktadır. Bu çalışmada, Aydın ilinde yetiştirilen Karya ırkı koyunların canlı ağırlık ve vücut ölçüleri üzerine koyun yaşının etkileri araştırılmıştır. Çalışmanın hayvan materyalini 2 ile ≥6 yaş aralığındaki 188 baş Karya ırkı koyun oluşturmuştur. Dikkate alınan vücut ölçülerinden vücut uzunluğu, cidago yüksekliği, sırt yüksekliği, sağrı yüksekliği, göğüs derinliği göğüs çevresi ve göğüs genişliği için elde edilen genel ortalamalar sırasıyla; 70.76, 71.45, 69.49, 69.54, 29.98, 88.75 ve 20.82 cm olarak elde edilmiştir. Çalışmada üzerinde durulan diğer bir karakter olan canlı ağırlığa ait genel ortalama 47.62 kg olarak elde edilmiştir. Çalışmada gerçekleştirilen istatistik analizlerde yaş faktörünün cidago yüksekliği ve göğüs genişliği dışında kalan tüm vücut ölçüleri üzerine etkisi istatistik olarak anlamlı bulunmuştur. Diğer yandan üzerinde durulan diğer bir karakter olan canlı ağırlık üzerine de yaş istatistiksel olarak önemli olmuştur. Özellikle canlı ağırlık üzerinde belirlenen anlamlı yaş etkisi, bireylerin gelişimsel süreçlerinin üretim parametreleri üzerindeki belirleyiciliğini vurgulamaktadır. Bu sonuçlar, yaşın hem morfolojik karakterizasyon hem de verim tahmin modellerinde kritik bir kovaryet olarak dikkate alınması gerektiğini açıkça göstermektedir.

Latar Belakang: Masalah gizi pada remaja dapat menyebabkan gangguan kesehatan seperti rendahnya daya tahan tubuh, hambatan pertumbuhan otot, serta penurunan kecerdasan. Remaja obesitas juga berisiko tinggi mengalami penyakit kardiovaskular, stroke, dan kanker. Salah satu penyebabnya adalah pola sarapan yang tidak sehat akibat kurangnya pemahaman masyarakat terhadap pentingnya sarapan sesuai pedoman gizi seimbang. Penelitian ini bertujuan mengetahui faktor-faktor yang berhubungan dengan perilaku sarapan sehat siswa di SMK Farmasi Muhammadiyah Cirebon tahun 2025.Metode: Penelitian ini menggunakan metode analitik deskriptif dengan desain cross sectional. Sampel sebanyak 77 siswa dipilih dengan teknik disproportional stratified random sampling. Data dikumpulkan melalui kuesioner yang valid dan reliabel, dianalisis dengan uji Rank Spearman dan regresi logistik.Hasil: Hasil menunjukkan terdapat hubungan signifikan antara sikap dan perilaku sarapan sehat (p = 0,009). Namun, variabel lain seperti jenis kelamin, teman sebaya, iklan, pendidikan ibu, pengetahuan, dan dukungan orang tua tidak menunjukkan hubungan signifikan.Kesimpulan: Sikap menjadi faktor paling dominan yang memengaruhi perilaku sarapan sehat

Background: Carpal tunnel syndrome is common, and carpal tunnel syndrome-6 (CTS-6) is a validated diagnostic tool; however, its weighted scoring limits rapid use. We evaluated a simplified quick carpal tunnel syndrome-6 (QCTS-6) for diagnostic accuracy. Methods: Carpal tunnel releases performed at a tertiary care center (January 2017-August 2024) were retrospectively identified. Preoperative presence or absence of the components of the CTS-6 were reviewed and assigned the corresponding number of points. For the QCTS-6 scoring system, 0 or 1 point was assigned for a total score out of 6. Preoperative electromyography (EMG)/nerve conduction study (NCS) results were collected when available. Descriptive statistics, Spearman’s Rho correlations, and diagnostic ratio tests were performed. Results: A total of 1143 patients met the inclusion criteria. There was a strong positive relationship between the CTS-6 and QCTS-6 scores for the overall cohort ( r = 0.976). Patients with QCTS-6 score of 3 or more exhibited the presence of all questionnaire components and severe EMG/NCS findings at higher rates, with 98.2% of them having CTS-6 scores greater than 12. Diagnostic ratio testing identified numbness in the median nerve territory, nocturnal numbness, and loss of 2-point discrimination as the most balanced predictive factors. Conclusions: The QCTS-6 scoring system can be a valid alternative to the traditional CTS-6. Owing to its uniform scoring, it can allow for efficient workup without necessitating EMG/NCS. A score of 3 or more may serve as a sensitive cutoff for carpal tunnel syndrome.

Objective: To correlate patients perceived behavioral attributes of postgraduate residents to the assessed compliance status of the patients undergoing orthodontic treatment. Study Design: Analytical cross-sectional. Place and Duration of the Study: Department of Orthodontics, University College of Dentistry, The University of Lahore, Nov 2022 to Feb 2023. Methodology: The study comprised 215 orthodontic patients, who completed the pre-validated standardized proformas about the behavioral attributes of their treating postgraduate residents, comprising 25 questions based on 5-point Likert scale. The respective postgraduate residents assessed the patients' compliance based on the Orthodontic Patient Cooperation Scale (OPCS) where postgraduate residents and their patients were blind to each other’s responses. The age range of the patients was 12-29 years with mean age being 18.84±4.03 years. Non-probability convenience sampling technique was used. Results: A moderate positive correlation was noted between the behavior of the resident explaining the procedure step by step (Item 17) and the average patients' compliance score (r=0.47, p&lt;0.001). A mild positive correlation was present for the behavior of postgraduate residents, warning the patient if the procedure hurts (Item 1, r=0.28, p&lt;0.001), being polite (Item 9, r=0.24, p&lt;0.001) and punctual (Item 25, r=0.19, p=0.01) with favorable compliance of patients. Conclusion: Behavioral attributes of postgraduate residents positively correlate with the compliance of patients undergoing orthodontic treatment. Clinicians' behavior and step-by-step explanations, counseling of the patients for painful procedures, politeness in conversation and punctuality may lead to improved patient compliance score.

Viêm màng não do Enterovirus (VMN-EV) là nguyên nhân thường gặp nhất của viêm màng não virus ở trẻ em, thường khó phân biệt với viêm màng não do vi khuẩn tại thời điểm nhập viện, dẫn đến sử dụng kháng sinh không cần thiết. Nghiên cứu này nhằm:Mô tả thực trạng chẩn đoán, điều trị và đề xuất một số biện pháp cải thiện điều trị viêm màng não do EV tại bệnh viện Nhi Trung ương năm 2024-2025. Phương pháp: Nghiên cứu mô tả kết hợp hồi cứu (1/2024–4/2025) và tiến cứu (5–10/2025) trên trẻ từ 1 tháng đến 18 tuổi, chẩn đoán xác định VMN-EV bằng PCR dịch não tủy (DNT). Kết quả: 500 bệnh nhi được đưa vào nghiên cứu, tuổi trung bình 4,6 ± 1,2; nhóm 2–6 tuổi (43,4%). Nam(57,4%). Triệu chứng thường gặp: đau đầu (71,6%), sốt (66,0%), nôn (42,8%). Chỉ 27,4% bệnh nhân được chọc DNT tại tuyến dưới, trong đó 48,9% được làm PCR, 57,5% bệnh nhân dùng kháng sinh, chủ yếu ở nhóm không chọc DNT (75,8% so với 8,8%, p=0,02). Tuổi &lt;6 tháng, sốt cao, DNT &gt;100 bạch cầu/mm³ và CRP &gt;10 mg/L liên quan đến tăng nguy cơ dùng kháng sinh, trong khi PCR &lt;24h giúp giảm tỷ lệ này.Tỷ lệ khỏi hoàn toàn (99,6%), không khác biệt giữa nhóm dùng và không dùng kháng sinh. Kết luận: VMN-EV ở trẻ em có triệu chứng lâm sàng không đặc hiệu.Tỷ lệ chọc DNT và làm PCR tại tuyến dưới còn thấp, góp phần làm tăng lạm dụng kháng sinh. Chọc DNT sớm và làm PCR DNT có vai trò quan trọng trong chẩn đoán, quản lý kháng sinh hợp lý và tối ưu hóa điều trị.

Several bacteria could selectively use substrates among a combination of different carbon sources. Activated carbons exhibit a position for essential medicines and are involved in battling gastrointestinal and dermatological issues by removing toxins from the skin. Herein, in this research, we hypothesized that activated carbon nose pore strips could have helped diminish erythema scores, which is a concern for owners at initial dermatological referral. For this purpose, 116 pure or cross-bred owned dogs, from several different breeds, age and of both sexes, were deemed available for enrollment in 3 different groups. For a tentative diagnosis of atopic dermatitis (n=57, group I), cutaneous adverse food reaction (n=40, group II) and demodicosis (n=19, group III); epidermal corneometric analytes (skin pH and hydration), in vitro Ig E detection, dermatoscopy, bioresonance, breath nitric oxide test (low grade systemic inflammation), skin cytology along with visual analogue scale erythema severity score were deemed available. Erythema scoring was graded as 0 to 3. Skin microbiome manipulation by use of Activated charcoal (A-ch) nose strips was based on previously defined methodology by the same researcher group. A-ch Nose Pore Strips were placed onto the lesional skin, moistened, for at least 10 minutes. This allowed probable withdrawal of pathogens (removal), which were then A-ch strips removed. Day 10 measurements for the Visual analogue scale erythema severity score (VAS-ESS) revealed a difference between group II and others (p

Functional connectivity analysis in source space did not reliably differentiate patients by survival or tumor type following SE. These findings suggest that current connectivity metrics are insufficient as standalone prognostic tools in this context. Larger, more homogeneous cohorts and stratification by clinical and tumor characteristics are needed to clarify the potential prognostic value of EEG connectivity in this population.

Leptospirosis presents with nonspecific clinical features and requires time‐consuming laboratory tests for gold standard diagnosis. This study aims to design and characterize the recombinant LipL32 from synthetic gene and assess its performance as an antigen for detecting leptospirosis. The antigen was developed by cloning the LipL32 gene conserved portion of Leptospira interrogans serovar Icterohaemorrhagiae strain Langkawi. The immunoinformatic was used to characterize the developed rLipL32. Western blot results using anti‐histidine revealed a band of rLipL32 protein at ~40 kDa. Subsequently, it was used to examine the IgM antibody on human sera by using ELISA. The IgM‐LipL32 ELISA was evaluated using 67‐positive and 25‐negative sera and compared with a commercial ELISA. With a cut‐off value of 0.8, it showed 85.7% sensitivity, 83.3% specificity, a 48% positive prediction value (PPV), and 97% negative prediction value (NPV), indicating modest performance compared to existing commercial kits. The rLipL32 is a potential antigen for detecting IgM using ELISA; however, for use in low incidence areas, a confirmation test is crucial.

Purpose: This study aimed to compare clinical, nutritional, and endoscopic outcomes among Roux-en-Y (RY), uncut Roux-en-Y (uRY), and Billroth II with Braun anastomosis (BB) reconstruction methods in gastric cancer patients after distal gastrectomy.Methods: This retrospective study analyzed gastric cancer patients who underwent laparoscopic distal gastrectomy between January 2018 and December 2022, categorized into RY, uRY, and BB. Demographic, pathological, clinical, nutritional, and endoscopic data were collected over 24 months. Endoscopic outcomes were assessed using the RGB scoring system, evaluating residual food, gastritis, and bile reflux. Delayed gastric emptying was defined by clinical and imaging criteria. Multivariable linear regression was performed to identify relevant factors associated with 24 months RGB scores and mixed linear model was applied to assess the time interaction.Results: A total of 221 patients were included (70 RY, 75 uRY, 76 BB). Baseline characteristics, perioperative and nutritional outcomes were comparable among groups. The uRY group showed less weight loss at 3 months (5.9%, P&lt;0.05) but did not differ in other studied periods. The RY group had the lowest RGB scores at all time points, while BB showed the highest and progressively worsening scores. Regression model showed that BB and uRY was related to increase 24 month RGB score. BB showed increased RGB score while RY was stable in time and uRY showed intermediate change in the mixed linear model (P&lt;0.05).Conclusion: The nutritional clinical outcomes were comparable between the reconstructions. RY reconstruction demonstrated favorable endoscopic outcomes, while BB was associated with higher RGB scores in time.

Background: The rapid emergence of large language models (LLMs) has transformed scientific writing, prompting concerns regarding the extent to which generative artificial intelligence (AI) tools may be influencing published research manuscripts. AI-detection software has been proposed as a method to identify AI-generated text; however, the validity of these tools in scientific contexts remains uncertain. This study evaluates detectable AI content in articles published in the Journal of Craniofacial Surgery (JCFS) before and after the widespread adoption of LLMs. Methods: A retrospective cross-sectional analysis was conducted using all JCFS articles published in 2014 (pre-LLM) and 2024 (post-LLM). Full-text manuscripts and individual sections (Abstract, Introduction, Methods, Results, Discussion, Conclusion) were analyzed using ZeroGPT to determine the percentage of detectable AI-generated text. Detection scores were compared using the Mann-Whitney U test. Results: A total of 1490 manuscripts were analyzed (659 in 2014; 831 in 2024). Mean detectable AI content increased from 8.6% (SD 9.8) in 2014 to 10.7% (SD 10.4) in 2024 ( P = 0.00001). Section-level comparison demonstrated the greatest increase in Results sections (19.8%–24.1%, P = 0.00001), with additional increases in Introduction, Methods, Discussion, and Conclusion sections, but no significant change in Abstracts (13.4% versus13.9%, P = 0.32). Although statistically significant, these differences were small in absolute magnitude. Conclusions: Detectable AI content in JCFS manuscripts increased modestly over the past decade, likely reflecting detection software behavior and evolving writing structure rather than widespread use of generative AI. Findings support cautious interpretation of AI-detection outputs and highlight the need for validated tools and thoughtful editorial policy development.

Objective: To investigate reasons for choosing medical profession, preferences among different specialties as career choice, and willingness to choose medical profession again, if given another chance, among medical (MBBS) and dental (BDS) students at a public sector medical college. Study Design: Analytical cross-sectional. Place and Duration of Study: Army Medical College, Rawalpindi, Pakistan, from Dec 2022 to Feb 2023. Methodology: A total of 1117 (925 MBBS and 192 BDS) students were included in this study. They answered a questionnaire about their motivations for choosing medicine and their preferred specialty out of a provided list (22 specialties for MBBS and 10 for BDS). Data was analyzed using IBM SPSS version 22.0. Results: Majority of students (340, 30.4%) chose medical professional for better lifestyle, high financial gains (204, 18.3%), and respect in society (182, 16.3%). There was a statistically significant relationship found between the reasons for joining medical professional and students of MBBS and BDS (p-value&lt;0.001). Conclusions: These findings highlight the prominent role of extrinsic rewards and perceived social status in shaping career preferences among medical and dental undergraduates. The most frequently cited determinant of specialty selection among students in this cohort was the expectation of lucrative financial prospects and a secure future, with respect and social prestige also serving as important motivating factors.

Background and Objectives: Current evidence remains insufficient to determine whether the impact of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) on dental health is primarily mediated through oral hygiene and dietary habits or through direct effects of the disorder itself. This study examined the theoretical pathways through which ASD severity and toothbrushing-related and dietary-choice-related factors influence dental health in autistic children and adolescents. Materials and Methods: A cross-sectional study was conducted with 399 mothers reporting on their autistic children (aged 2–18 years, mean = 7.8). The exclusion criterion was being older than 18 years. Data included parent-reported data about ASD severity, dental health status, willingness to brush teeth, and dietary quality (assessed using the Diet Quality Inventory). Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) was used to analyze the direct and indirect effects of ASD severity on dental health, with probit regression coefficients estimated using the WLSMV method. Results: Parent-reported variables of ASD severity, diet quality, and toothbrushing willingness together explained 37% of the variance in dental health. The direct effect of ASD severity on dental health was 0.199 (p = 0.039). The indirect effect via toothbrushing was 0.137 (p = 0.006), and via diet quality, it was 0.070 (p = 0.020). The total indirect effect of ASD on dental health was 0.207 (p = 0.026), which was approximately as strong as the direct effect. The associations among the studied variables were statistically equivalent across sex and age groups. Conclusions: Parent-reported ASD severity shows significant association with dental health outcomes, both directly and indirectly, with toothbrushing behavior emerging as the primary mediator. Interventions that promote regular brushing (and, to a lesser extent, healthier eating) may help to reduce the dental health disparities associated with autism.

Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES) is a relatively rare central nerve condition. Here, we report a case of PRES that developed during acute pancreatitis in a previously healthy man in his 40s. On the third day, his respiratory status worsened during management of acute pancreatitis, requiring sedated ventilatory support. During ventilator management, his blood pressure was well-controlled, and no electrolyte abnormalities were observed; however, the patient was in a state of marked systemic inflammation. On the 12th day, after improvement in acute pancreatitis and respiratory status, with discontinuation of mechanical ventilation, the patient presented with mild disturbance of consciousness and visual field disturbance. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed diffuse vasogenic cerebral edema, mainly in the bilateral occipital and parietal white matter. The patient was provisionally diagnosed with PRES and was administered oral verapamil, along with supportive care. On the 23rd day, his neurological symptoms disappeared. Cerebral edema completely disappeared on MRI four months later. In the present case, it was speculated that endothelial dysfunction secondary to the severe inflammatory state accompanying acute pancreatitis caused PRES.

Objective: This study aimed to investigate the effects of Perga supplementation on glucose metabolism, body weight regulation, and amyloid-beta (Aβ) accumulation in a streptozotocin (STZ)-induced type 2 diabetes (T2D) rat model, focusing specifically on insulin, leptin, and fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21) signaling pathways. Methods: Male Wistar rats were divided into Sham (S), T2D, and T2D+Perga (T2DP) groups. T2D was induced by a single intraperitoneal (i.p.) STZ injection (60 mg/kg). Perga (200 mg/kg/day) was administered to the T2DP group by gavage 14 days after diabetes induction. Plasma and brain insulin and leptin levels, liver and plasma FGF21 concentrations, Homeostasis Model Assessment of Beta Cell Function (HOMA-β) index, fasting glucose levels, body weight changes, and brain amyloid-beta (Aβ) accumulation were evaluated. Results: STZ-induced T2D resulted in hypoinsulinemia, decreased HOMA-β scores, weight loss, reduced plasma leptin, increased brain leptin, decreased FGF21 levels, and significant Aβ accumulation in the hippocampus. Perga treatment significantly improved plasma and brain insulin levels, increased HOMA-β, reduced fasting glucose, and attenuated weight loss. Plasma leptin levels returned to normal, brain leptin levels decreased, and hippocampus Aβ burden was significantly reduced. In addition, perga supplementation almost normalized liver and plasma FGF21 levels. Conclusion: Perga supplementation effectively ameliorates metabolic dysfunction and neurodegenerative markers in the T2D model. Its regulatory effects on insulin, leptin, and FGF21 signaling highlight its potential as a natural therapeutic agent in managing T2D and associated AD-like pathology. Further research is needed to evaluate its clinical applicability.

Background: One prevalent kind of skin cancer is cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (CSCC), with advanced stages historically having limited treatment options and poor outcomes. A possible treatment is cemiplimab, an inhibitor of programmed cell death-1 (PD-1). This systematic review aims to consolidate evidence from clinical trials on the efficacy and safety of cemiplimab across the spectrum of advanced CSCC. Methods: Using PubMed/MEDLINE, Embase, Web of Science, and Cochrane Central from the beginning to the present, a thorough literature search was carried out in accordance with PRISMA standards. Included were prospective clinical studies examining cemiplimab in adult patients with resectable, metastatic, or locally advanced CSCC. Objective reaction rate (ORR) and pathological complete response (pCR) were the main results. Safety and survival were secondary outcomes. Results: Seven studies (one Phase 3 RCT, six Phase 2 trials) were included. Cemiplimab showed significant and long-lasting effectiveness in advanced CSCC, with ORRs ranging from 41.1% to 62%. In a critical examination, 87.8% of respondents continued to answer after a year, failing to meet the median duration of response. High pCR rates (51–73%) in the neoadjuvant context allowed for less involved surgery. Adjuvant cemiplimab was found to be a new standard of treatment in the Phase 3 C-POST study, which reduced the risk of mortality or illness recurrence by 68% (Hazard Ratio 0.32) when compared to placebo. With 23.9% to 44% of patients experiencing Grade ≥3 treatment-emergent side events, the safety profile was reasonable and in line with the PD-1 inhibitor class. Conclusion: Cemiplimab is a highly effective and indispensable therapy for CSCC, demonstrating robust and durable efficacy across metastatic, locally advanced, neoadjuvant, and adjuvant settings. Its manageable safety profile solidifies its role as a cornerstone treatment, marking a paradigm shift in the management of this disease.

This study aims to examine the relationship between workload and job stress among emergency room nurses at Prof. Dr. H. Aloei Saboe Regional General Hospital, Gorontalo City. A quantitative correlational research design with a cross-sectional approach was employed. The total population of 33 emergency room nurses was included as research participants through total sampling. Data were collected using standardized Likert-scale questionnaires measuring workload and job stress, adapted respectively from Gawron in Grech et al. (2009) and Robbins and Judge referenced in Ramlah et al. (2021). The collected data were analyzed using the Spearman Rank correlation test with a significance level of α = 0.05, following preliminary descriptive and normality examinations. The findings indicate that 48.5% of nurses experienced workload in the moderate category, while 39.4% reported moderate job stress levels. The correlation test revealed a strong positive relationship between workload and job stress (r = 0.890, p &lt; 0.05), demonstrating that increased workload is associated with higher stress among nurses. These results emphasize the importance of workload management and institutional support in reducing psychological strain and enhancing the well-being of emergency room nursing personnel.

Tujuan: Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk menganalisis pengaruh hilirisasi industri manufaktur di Kalimantan terhadap pertumbuhan hijau yang inklusif. Desain/Metodologi/Pendekatan: Dengan menggunakan data dari Badan Pusat Statistik dan menerapkan konsep inclusive green growth (IGG), penelitian ini membagi pertumbuhan tersebut ke dalam tiga dimensi: ekonomi, sosial, dan lingkungan, yang diukur melalui 17 variabel. Penelitian ini mengadopsi metode normalisasi Minimum-Maksimum untuk data, sehingga memungkinkan perbandingan yang setara antarvariabel. Penelitian ini menggunakan metode regresi panel untuk mengestimasi pengaruh kebijakan hilirisasi manufaktur terhadap pertumbuhan hijau inklusif di Pulau Kalimantan. Temuan: Hasil dari penelitian ini menunjukkan variasi signifikan antarprovinsi dalam pencapaian IGGI. Analisis regresi yang dilakukan menunjukkan bahwa meskipun hilirisasi berpotensi mendukung pertumbuhan hijau, faktor-faktor lain seperti kondisi ekonomi dan sosial daerah juga berperan penting. Temuan ini menegaskan perlunya kebijakan yang terintegrasi yang tidak hanya fokus pada hilirisasi tetapi juga pada peningkatan sosial dan pengelolaan lingkungan untuk mencapai pertumbuhan yang berkelanjutan dan inklusif. Keterbatasan dan Implikasi Penelitian: Keterbatasan proksi hilirisasi (dummy) dan ketersediaan data dapat memengaruhi generalisasi; riset lanjut perlu indikator hilirisasi yang lebih granular serta evaluasi kausal jangka panjang lintas-sektor. Implikasi Praktis: Kebijakan hilirisasi berperan sebagai mekanisme kondisional yang menentukan apakah industrialisasi manufaktur mampu mendorong pertumbuhan hijau inklusif, sehingga implementasinya perlu diintegrasikan dengan regulasi lingkungan, investasi teknologi bersih, dan disesuaikan dengan karakteristik provinsi di Kalimantan. Orisinalitas/Nilai: Studi regional pertama yang menggabungkan indeks IGG komposit dan interaksi kebijakan hilirisasi-manufaktur di Kalimantan untuk menilai dampak keberlanjutan yang inklusif.

White patients were disproportionately more likely to be prescribed teprotumumab than Black patients, potentially due to prescriber bias, socioeconomic challenges, and medical distrust. Trends show progress towards more equitable distribution.

Endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) is a widely accepted treatment for aortic pathologies owing to its minimally invasive nature. However, long-term complications, such as stent graft migration and infection, remain unresolved, primarily due to the persistent presence of synthetic materials and limited tissue integration. This pilot study evaluated the feasibility of a novel tissue-engineered stent graft (TESG) combining a bioresorbable poly-L-lactic acid (PLLA) stent with decellularized porcine veins. The veins were processed using a sodium dodecyl sulfate and the Triton X-100 decellularization protocol. Histological and ultrastructural analyses confirmed effective cell removal while preserving extracellular matrix components. Quantitative deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) analysis showed a > 97% reduction in DNA content. The TESGs were assembled by suturing the decellularized veins into bioresorbable PLLA stents and implanted into porcine iliac arteries (<i>n</i> = 3). Commercially available prosthetic grafts were used as control implants to evaluate differences in tissue responses. Graft patency and morphology were assessed at implantation and on postoperative day 14 using angiography and intravascular ultrasonography. All TESGs remained patent, with no evidence of thrombosis or aneurysmal changes. Histological analysis revealed early endothelialization and smooth muscle cell infiltration within the TESG wall, in contrast to the prosthetic graft controls, which lacked comparable cellular integration. This study demonstrated the short-term feasibility and biological compatibility of a fully bioresorbable TESG. Although long-term outcomes remain to be established, these results support further development of TESG to reduce late complications through improved tissue integration and avoidance of permanent synthetic materials.

Abstract Background Accurate routine surveillance data are essential for malaria control and elimination. However, the multistep reporting process used in most malaria-affected countries can introduce discrepancies between health facility registers and national health management information systems, often based on the District Health Information System 2 (DHIS2). This study assessed the concordance of malaria rapid diagnostic test (RDT) data across facility registers, monthly summary forms (MSFs) and the DHIS2 in four sub-Saharan countries. Methods In 2023, we conducted an observational study in Benin, Côte d’Ivoire, Nigeria, and Uganda, using harmonized tools and methods. In each country, 16 public primary health care facilities were selected from two regions. The total number of RDTs and positive results from health facility registers, MSFs and the DHIS2 were compared over three to five months. We assessed concordance using Bland–Altman plots, weighted absolute percentage error (WAPE)-based aggregate data reporting accuracy (WADRA), and verification factors (VFs). System- and facility-level differences were examined by stratifying indicators by region, baseline outpatient volume and test positivity rate. Results Across 64 facilities, 104,396 RDTs (58,304 positives, 55.8%) were recorded in registers, compared to 112,435 (62,903 positives, 55.9%) in MSFs and 110,771 (62,761 positives, 56.7%) in DHIS2. Benin showed the highest concordance across data sources, while Nigeria and Uganda had the lowest. Positive RDT results were more likely to be reported than total RDTs, particularly in Nigeria, where VFs indicated consistent overreporting (mean VF 0.74, 95% CI: 0.61–0.89). WADRA analysis showed low reporting accuracy for positive RDTs in 6 (38%) Nigerian and 5 (31%) Ugandan facilities. Regional differences were notable in Nigeria and Uganda. In Nigeria, higher outpatient volume was associated with lower concordance; no trend was seen for baseline test positivity rate. Conclusions Substantial variation in RDT data concordance was observed across countries and facilities. Concordance was strongest between MSFs and DHIS2, suggesting data entry was not a significant issue. Strengthening routine data validation and using accuracy and direction-sensitive metrics, such as WADRA and VFs, could improve malaria data reliability. Further research should explore system-level factors influencing data quality and identify scalable solutions.

Recurrence and metastasis are the leading causes of poor prognosis and death in lung cancer, and the mechanism of cancer metastasis has not yet been fully elucidated. As a gut-specific homeobox (HOX) transcription factor, intestine-specific HOX (ISX) is a proto-oncogene induced by the inflammatory factor IL-6. Notably, ISX overexpression can induce the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) response, and promotes tumor cell migration and invasion. In the present study, a lung cancer cell model with overexpression of ISX was established by infecting lung cancer cells with lentivirus. Reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction was first used to verify the expression of the EMT-related gene induced by ISX overexpression. Furthermore, transcriptome sequencing and analysis showed that the overexpression of ISX induced significant changes in the gene expression profile of human lung cancer cells. In addition, type I collagen α1 chain (COL1A1), a highly expressed gene in various tumor tissues and cells, was shown to promote tumor cell migration and invasion, possibly by promoting EMT, and was significantly upregulated in human lung cancer cells overexpressing ISX. These results suggested that ISX may promote lung cancer migration and invasion by increasing the expression of COL1A1. In addition, four drugs that are currently used to treat lung cancer were screened. Of these, Iressa® (gefitinib) was revealed to significantly inhibit the viability, migration and invasion of lung cancer cells that stably overexpress ISX by downregulating the expression of COL1A1. In conclusion, these findings may help to prevent tumor metastasis and spread, and the potential molecular mechanism by which ISX promotes the development and migration of lung cancer was suggested. The current findings provide novel targets, and a scientific basis for the prevention and treatment of lung cancer, which may reduce costs for patients, their families and society.

Background: Family planning (FP) and optimal family spacing are crucial for improving maternal and child healthoutcomes. Despite progress, socio-cultural barriers, misconceptions, and limited autonomy continue to influencecontraceptive use among women in rural Bangladesh. Objective: To explore perceptions and practices regarding familyplanning and family spacing among currently married women of reproductive age (CMWRA) and to identify factorsinfluencing contraceptive choice and continuation. Methods: A cross-sectional study was conducted from January toJune 2021 among 480 married women aged 15–40 years with at least two children, using interviewer-administeredquestionnaires using a convenient sampling method. Descriptive statistics and chi-square tests were performed usingSPSS version 26. Results: The mean age of participants was 26.8 ± 4.8 years, with 73.5% aged 21–30 years. Mostwere housewives (92.7%) and nearly half (44.8%) had married before 18 years. Oral contraceptive pills were the mostcommonly used method both previously (67.3%) and currently (54.2%), followed by condoms (17.3%) and injectables(16.5%). Method choice was significantly associated with educational status (p = 0.0001). Side effects such as nausea(47.8%) and irregular bleeding (22.8%) were common reasons for discontinuation or switching. While most women(83.5%) reported no barrier to FP adoption, barriers included husband’s objection (7.3%), social opposition (5.4%),and religious beliefs (3.8%). Overcoming factors were self-motivation (63.5%), spousal support (17.7%), and healthworker advice (18.8%). Almost all respondents (97.7%) reported good availability of contraceptive methods locally.Conclusion: Educational attainment strongly influences contraceptive choice, strengthening counseling services,addressing misconceptions, and promoting female education can improve informed decision-making and sustainableFP use in rural Bangladesh.

Objective: This study aims to examine the differences in cerebrospinal fluid among patients with acute infarcts, chronic infarcts, and healthy controls by evaluating the density of cerebrospinal fluid via computed tomography (CT) scans of the brain. Materials and Methods: In this study, density measurements of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) were retrospectively conducted from the lateral ventricle in a sample of 128 patients. The analysis incorporated diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (DWI) alongside CT scans of the brain. A circular region of interest (ROI) with an area of 0.25 cm² was consistently applied for the density measurements in each case. Results: The analysis of mean intraventricular density values in relation to infarct status revealed that individuals with acute infarction exhibited a mean density of 5.79 HU, which was the lowest recorded, while those without infarction had a mean density of 6.36 HU, representing the highest value. Conclusions: The analysis of changes in CSF using CT in acute and chronic stroke conditions plays a vital role in understanding the extent of neurological injury and in the development of appropriate therapeutic interventions. Evaluation of changes in CSF in acute and chronic infarctions plays a critical role in understanding the course of the disease.

Purpose: Traumatic abdominal wall hernia, a rare condition resulting from blunt trauma, is characterized by disruption of the abdominal wall musculature and fascia without skin penetration. Given its rarity, standardized treatment guidelines are lacking, and the necessity for immediate surgery remains debated. This study examines high-energy posterolateral abdominal wall injuries (AWI), which pose significant management challenges due to their anatomical complexity and high recurrence risk.Methods: We retrospectively reviewed records of 44 adults with grade III–VI AWI treated between 2013 and 2023 at a level I trauma center. Patients were categorized into emergency repair or delayed management groups based on the initial treatment strategy, with injuries anatomically classified as anterior, lateral, or posterolateral. Nonoperative management (NOM) was limited to patients without herniation on index imaging and entailed close observation with regular follow-up imaging.Results: AWI was identified in 44 of 83,532 patients (0.05%) with blunt trauma. Anatomically, 4 cases (9.1%) were anterior, 17 (38.6%) were lateral, and 23 (52.3%) were posterolateral. Three patients (6.8%) were classified as grade III injury, 16 (36.4%) as grade IV, 24 (54.6%) as grade V, and 1 (2.3%) as grade VI. Emergency repair was performed in 26 patients (59.1%), whereas 18 (40.9%) initially received delayed management. In the latter group, 8 of 18 patients (44.4%) were judged to require delayed repair, of whom six proceeded to surgery. Among 10 NOM patients with indeterminate muscle-layer integrity on initial imaging due to hematoma or tissue injury, follow-up revealed delayed hernia development in three, while seven had resolved hematoma, confirming wall integrity.Conclusions: In hemodynamically stable patients with traumatic posterolateral AWI without herniation, NOM with close monitoring and delayed repair for subsequent hernia appears safe and effective as an alternative to immediate surgery. Management should be tailored to injury location and patient condition. These findings inform the management timing and approach for this rare, challenging injury pattern.

<title>Abstract</title> <bold>Background:</bold> Male urethral stricture continues to be a common and challenging urologic condition. Despite the high failure rate of endoscopic urethrotomy, direct visual internal urethrotomy (DVIU) remains the most commonly performed procedure for the treatment of urethral strictures. It is an effective short-term treatment, but the long-term success rate is low. In this article, we reported the outcome of endoscopic management of anterior urethral stricture. <bold>Objective:</bold> The aim of the study was to evaluate the outcome of endoscopic urethrotomy. <bold>Study design:</bold> This is a prospective descriptive study in patients admitted to General Military Hospital (GMH) Sana’a in the period between Jan. 2023 to September. 2025. <bold>Patients and methods:</bold> Forty-two patients with anterior urethral stricture are included, whom underwent endoscopic urethrotomy The mean age of the patients is 41.5 years ranging between 19-72 years. All patients were evaluated by history, local and systemic physical examination, and radiological assessment according to each case. <bold>Results:</bold> Of 42 patients presented to the hospital, the most common etiology was iatrogenic (38.1%), followed by blunt trauma (31%), penetrating trauma (14.3%), idiopathic (9.5%), and inflammation (7.1%). The most common site of urethral stricture was bulbar (35.7%), followed by penile (28.6%), membranous (28.6%), and Pan-urethra (7.1%) of cases. The overall complication rate was 26.2%, with reccurnce of stricture (42.8%) being the most common. The only significant difference was observed in relation to stricture length and location. <bold>Conclusion:</bold> Endoscopic management is usually the first option for many cases of anterior urethral stricture, because of being simple, cost-effective and its repeatability. However, for strictures that are longer than 2 cm, and in patients whom multiple DVIU attempt failed reconstruction urethroplasy is advised.

High rates of impairment across multiple domains of intrinsic capacity were identified among older adults in this setting. The study supports the feasibility of ICOPE in Pakistan and highlights the importance of its wider implementation to facilitate early decline in intrinsic capacity in ageing populations.

This study focuses on the development and optimization of a self-emulsifying drug delivery system (SEDDS) for Nevirapine, a BCS Class II non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NNRTI) used in HIV therapy. Our objective was to significantly improve Nevirapine's oral bioavailability through a comprehensive in vitro dissolution study. We systematically assessed Nevirapine's solubility in various vehicles to identify the most effective component combinations. By using Chromophore RH40 as the surfactant, PEG400 as the co-surfactant, and Carbomer 940 as the oil phase, we created detailed pseudo-ternary phase diagrams. From this analysis, we selected eight formulations with Carbomer 940 at Smix ratios of 1:1, 2:1, and 3:1. The results indicate that the NEVIRAPINE-loaded SEDDS demonstrate enhanced solubilization and nanosizing capabilities, effectively improving drug absorption and potentially leading to better therapeutic outcomes.

<title>Abstract</title> Background Media health literacy (MHL) has been increasingly recognized as an important skill in identifying false or misleading health information on the internet. Although this association has been explored in medicine and public health, few studies have focused specifically on dentistry. The aim of the present study was to investigate the association between MHL levels and the ability to discern fake news in the field of dentistry. Methods A cross-sectional study was conducted with 240 participants recruited using a snowball sampling strategy. The participants answered a sociodemographic questionnaire, the eHealth Literacy Scale (eHEALS), and a custom-designed fake news questionnaire addressing dental topics. Descriptive analysis, the Mann–Whitney test, and linear regression models were used to identify associations between variables. Results Among the 240 participants, 75.8% were female and 65.9% were between 24 and 39 years of age. Most participants had a monthly income more than R$4,000 and 49.6% held postgraduate degrees. The median eHEALS score was 32 (maximum of 40), whereas the median fake news discernment score was 3 out of 8. Higher MHL levels (eHEALS scores) were significantly associated with having a postgraduate degree, income over R$8,000, and being a healthcare professional, particularly a dentist (p &lt; 0.05). The regression analysis showed that occupation and eHEALS score were significant predictors of the ability to discern fake news. Conclusions Higher media health literacy is associated with a greater ability to recognize misinformation in dentistry. Even among dental professionals, gaps in the critical assessment of online content persist. Educational strategies aimed at improving MHL should be prioritized to enhance public and professional discernment, mitigate the spread of fake news, and promote informed decision-making in oral health.

ABSTRACT Hepatitis E virus (HEV) causes acute and chronic hepatitis in humans. The zoonotic HEV genotype 3 (HEV-3) is present in various animal species, including pigs, wild boars, and other game animals. Foodborne transmission with the consumption of raw or undercooked pork products is the major transmission route of HEV-3. HEV RNA has been detected in various types of food, but particularly in pork liver-based food products. High hydrostatic pressure processing (HPP) can be used for the inactivation of pathogens in food. In the present study, the impact of HPP treatments was evaluated on HEV-3 infectivity in raw pork liver. Different pressure/time combinations (500 MPa for 1 or 5 min, 600 MPa for 1, 5, or 10 min) were applied to raw pork livers, artificially contaminated with HEV-3 (8.3 log 10 HEV ge/g). Residual HEV infectivity was evaluated using the HepaRG cell culture model in p-24 well plates. The results obtained have shown the absence of residual infectious HEV particles in pork liver after a treatment of 600 MPa, during 1 min in a refrigerated room at +8°C. Then, liver sausages were prepared with pork liver treated at 600 MPa for 1 min. Technological measurements showed that the treatment had a significant impact on brightness, firmness, red hue, and cohesiveness. Nevertheless, these differences have not been perceived after food testing, which highlighted no major difference in taste or color. Thus, inactivation of HEV-3 in raw pork liver by HPP is a possible treatment to limit the risk of HEV exposure through food consumption. IMPORTANCE The hepatitis E virus (HEV) is the leading cause of enterically transmitted acute hepatitis worldwide. It can have a zoonotic origin through the consumption of infected meat. Pigs are the main reservoir of zoonotic HEV, and pork livers are frequently contaminated by HEV. In the present study, we investigated the use of high-pressure processing (HPP) to inactivate HEV-3 in pork liver. This study is the first to identify HPP treatment parameters that can be applied to pork liver to reduce HEV infectivity. Additionally, it is the first study to demonstrate the feasibility of processing HPP-treated pork liver into food products, such as dry liver sausage.

Introduction Modified electroconvulsive therapy (MECT) is widely utilized for severe psychiatric disorders, with ongoing exploration of stimulus parameters to maximize efficacy. The pulse width in electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), specifically brief pulse (1.5 ms) versus ultra brief pulse (0.5 ms), may significantly influence clinical outcomes. However, comparative data on efficacy in rural Indian settings are limited. Our objective was to compare the clinical efficacy of brief and ultra brief pulse widths in bitemporal modified ECT in patients with severe psychiatric disorders. Methods: This prospective, randomized comparative study was conducted at a rural tertiary care hospital in Northern India. Sixty-six patients aged between 18 and 60 years, diagnosed with schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, bipolar disorder, or severe depression, were randomly allocated to receive either brief or ultra brief pulse bitemporal MECT. Clinical efficacy was measured using standardized symptom rating scales including PANSS, BDI, YMRS, and CGI-S, administered pre- and post-treatment. Results: Both brief and ultra brief pulse width groups demonstrated comparable clinical efficacy across schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, bipolar disorder, and severe depression, with no statistically significant differences observed in symptom reduction between the two groups (p &gt; 0.05). Conclusion: Brief and ultra brief pulse widths in bitemporal modified ECT exhibited similar clinical efficacy in the treatment of major psychiatric disorders. Given their equivalence in therapeutic outcomes, both pulse widths may be considered viable options for clinicians. Further studies with larger samples and diverse populations are recommended to reinforce these findings.

Ö z e t Basın ve eğitim arasında birbirlerini etkileme noktasında amaç birliklerimiz söz konusudur. Aslında bakıldığında medyanın işlevleri arasında eğitim de bulunmaktadır. Ülkemizde her gün gazete basılmakta bu gazetelerde birçok habere yer verilmekte köşe yazıları hazırlanmaktadır. Araştırmanın amacı 2023 -2024 eğitim öğretim yılının son 6 ayında Türkiye'deki gazetelerin ilk sayfalarında eğitime nasıl yer verdiklerini incelemek oluşturmaktadır. İncelemede Türkiye'deki ulusal günlük gazetelerinden 4 gazetenin 1. sayfaları üzerinden gerçekleştirilmiştir. Gazeteler belirlenirken söz konusu gazetelerin siyasi ideolojik duruşları iktidar karşısındaki konumlanışları ile farklı çizgi ve eğilimde olmalarına özellikle dikkat edilmiştir aynı zamanda gazetelerin tirajları da dikkate alınarak seçim yapılmıştır. İncelemenin örneklerini teşkil eden ve 1 Eylül 2023- 31 Aralık 2023 tarihleri arasında Cumhuriyet, Sabah, Sözcü ve Yeni Şafak gazetelerin ilk sayfaları incelenmiştir. Zamanla ilgili tercihte bu sene yeni göreve atanan bakanla birlikte eğitimde yapılan sınavlarla ilgili değişimlerin ve müfredatın gazetelere nasıl yansıdığını inceleme isteği belirleyici olmuştur. Araştırmamızın sonucunda gazetelerin eğitimle ilgili gazetelerin ilk sayfalarında yer verdikleri tespit edilmiş ama her gazete kendi ideolojik görüşüne göre haberleri yorumladığını görülmüştür arıya elde edilen bulgular doğrultusunda eğitim ile ilgili haberlerin gazetelerde daha çok ideolojilerden uzak bir şekilde yer verilmesinin eğitim açısından daha faydalı olacağı düşünülmektedir. Anahtar Kelimeler: Basın, Medya, Gazete, Eğitim, İdeoloji,

<ns3:p>Purpose To report the impact of front surface eccentricity (FSE) of scleral lenses (SCLs) on the visual performance of eyes exhibiting refractive surgery-induced higher-order aberrations (HOAs) Method A female teenager presented to the clinic with blurring of vision and dependency on spectacles even after undergoing Small Incision Lenticule Extraction (SMILE) in both eyes (BE). Her presenting uncorrected high contrast distance visual acuity (HCDVA) was 20/60 in the right eye (RE) and 20/40 in the left eye (LE). On examination, the cornea showed a ring-shaped area of ablation with faint scarring and a well-apposed lenticule-extraction site. Subjective refraction improved the HCDVA to 20/20p in RE and 20/25 in LE but the patient was not satisfied with the quality of vision. Ocular aberrometry revealed an increase in total HOAs as the underlying cause of unsatisfactory vision. Result A contact lens trial was recommended for BE to enhance visual quality. Rigid corneal lenses (RCLs) were tried, but the patient was intolerant to them. Large diameter SCLs of different FSEs (0, 0.6, and 0.8) were tried to reduce these aberrations. SCL with FSE 0 yielded the most favourable visual outcome. Conclusion With this case report, we hypothesize that the eccentricity of SCL can be selected according to the asphericity (at 6 mm) of the posterior corneal surface. This case also re-emphasizes the impact of SCL with varying FSEs on reducing HOAs and enhancing visual quality in eyes where conventional RCLs yield suboptimal results.</ns3:p>

Globally one fifth of the world’s population is affected by anaemia, with pregnant women being among the worst affected. In India, including Goa, anaemia prevalence among pregnant women has worsened per national family health survey (NFHS-5), prompting the launch of the Anaemia Mukt Bharat program. One key intervention was the provision of digital hemoglobinometers at sub-centres for point-of-care testing (POCT). Despite investments, implementation of POCT for anaemia diagnosis among pregnant women in Goa remains limited. This descriptive qualitative study was conducted in sub-centres of North Goa equipped with digital hemoglobinometers to understand enablers and barriers to POCT implementation. From December 2023 to April 2024, 11 in-depth interviews were conducted with healthcare workers and a state program officer. Data was analysed using thematic analysis guided by the consolidated framework for implementation research (CFIR). Three key enablers were identified: availability and benefits of digital hemoglobinometers, decentralized procurement, and strengthened health information systems. Healthcare workers valued the POCT devices for their ease of use and portability. However, barriers included staffing shortages, inconsistent supply of consumables, technical malfunctions, and limited opportunities for testing due to low patient follow-up. The lack of formal training and quality assurance also affects implementation. Digital hemoglobinometers have simplified anaemia testing at sub-centres, but administrative, logistical, and technical barriers hinder effective implementation. Addressing these challenges through consistent supply chains, formal training, and quality assurance can improve the utilization of POCT for diagnosing anaemia in pregnant women. Strengthening follow-up care and routine haemoglobin testing during antenatal visits is vital to reduce anaemia among this vulnerable population.

Abstract Burn injuries are a significant concern in developing countries due to limited infrastructure, and treating them remains a major challenge. The manual assessment of burn severity is subjective and depends, to a large extent, on individual expertise. Artificial intelligence can automate this task with greater accuracy and improved predictions, which can assist healthcare professionals in making more informed decisions while triaging burn injuries. This study established a model pipeline for detecting burn injuries in images using multiple deep learning models, including U-Net, DenseNet, ResNet, VGG, EfficientNet, and transfer learning with the Segment Anything Model2 (SAM2). The problem statement was divided into two stages: 1) removing the background and 2) burn skin segmentation. ResNet50, used as an encoder with a U-Net decoder, performs better for the background removal task, achieving an accuracy of 0.9757 and an intersection over union (Jaccard index) of 0.9480. DenseNet169, used as an encoder with a U-Net decoder, performs well in burn skin segmentation, achieving an accuracy of 0.9662 and an intersection over Union of 0.8504. The dataset collected during the project is available for download to facilitate further research and advancements (Link to dataset: https://geninfo.iitr.ac.in/projects ). TBSA was estimated from predicted burn masks using scale-based calibration

Bone grafting remains a cornerstone technique in orthopedic and reconstructive surgery, yet achieving successful graft integration continues to pose significant challenges, particularly in conditions such as osteoporosis, diabetes mellitus, and large bone defects. Traditional graft materials such as autografts, allografts, xenografts, and synthetics, often encounter limitations including immune rejection, poor vascularization, and insufficient osteogenic support. Emerging pharmacological strategies have shown promise in enhancing graft integration by modulating bone-healing pathways, promoting angiogenesis, and regulating inflammatory responses. This review comprehensively explores the biological mechanisms underlying bone repair, including the roles of key molecular pathways such as Wnt/β-catenin, BMP signaling, VEGF-mediated angiogenesis, and the RANK/RANKL/OPG axis. It further examines the therapeutic application of osteoinductive agents (e.g., BMPs, PTH analogs), anti-resorptive drugs (e.g., bisphosphonates, Denosumab), angiogenic modulators (e.g., VEGF, PDGF), and biologics targeting inflammatory cytokines (e.g., TNF-α, IL-6, IL-1β). Innovative approaches such as nanotechnology-based drug delivery, scaffold-based release systems, and gene therapy are also discussed for their potential to achieve localized, controlled, and sustained enhancement of graft performance. While several FDA-approved agents, such as rhBMP-2 and PDGF-BB, have advanced clinical practice, persistent challenges including variability in patient healing, delivery limitations, adverse effects, and regulatory hurdles, highlight the need for continued research. Future directions emphasize the development of multifunctional, personalized therapeutics that actively guide bone regeneration, supported by rigorous translational studies to ensure clinical efficacy and safety.

The DIBQ-SH showed good measurement properties for assessing factors that influence provision of sexual health services among French Canadian speaking clinicians who provide services to persons with stroke.

Abstract Computational phenotyping has emerged as a practical solution to the incomplete collection of data on gender in electronic health records (EHRs). This approach relies on algorithms to infer a patient’s gender using the available data in their health record, such as diagnosis codes, medication histories, and information in clinical notes. Although intended to improve the visibility of trans and gender-expansive populations in EHR-based biomedical research, computational phenotyping raises significant methodological and ethical concerns related to the potential misuse of algorithm outputs. In this paper, we provide a narrative review of computational phenotyping of gender and examine its challenges through a critical lens. We also highlight existing recommendations for biomedical researchers and propose priorities for future work in this domain.

El aumento de la cronicidad y la dependencia tecnológica en la población pediátrica plantea un reto para la continuidad de cuidados y la coordinación entre niveles asistenciales. La enfermera gestora de casos ha demostrado eficacia en población adulta al mejorar la calidad asistencial y reducir la utilización inadecuada de recursos; sin embargo, su implementación en el contexto pediátrico sigue siendo limitada. El objetivo de este proyecto fue definir la integración de la EGC en el proceso asistencial del Servicio de Pediatría Hospitalario, atendiendo a criterios de funcionalidad, eficiencia y calidad. Se elaboró un proyecto que adapta la experiencia y efectividad del modelo de EGC a las necesidades específicas del ámbito pediátrico. Se delimitaron el área de aplicación, el nivel asistencial y la población diana, y se definieron las competencias de la figura en Urgencias Pediátricas, Hospitalización, Neonatología y Consultas Externas. Asimismo, se analizó la demanda asistencial del paciente frágil pediátrico, identificando una proporción de ingresos evitables. La incorporación de esta figura con competencias avanzadas asistenciales y de gestión puede mejorar la continuidad de cuidados, la calidad de vida y la eficiencia del sistema sanitario, favoreciendo una atención integral y coordinada.

Abstract Purpose Bereiter trochleoplasty (TP) performed in patients with patello‐femoral instability (PFI) is a promising treatment leading to good clinical results and a low re‐dislocation rate in most patients. Knowledge of risk factors for a less optimal outcome that could help guide patient selection is sparse. The aim of the study was to identify factors influencing clinical outcome after Bereiter TP. Methods This is a retrospective register study evaluating patients treated with TP according to the Copenhagen PFI algorithm. Investigated factors, present in the hospital register and suspected from clinical experience to be potentially influencing outcome in TP, were: Body mass index (BMI) &gt;/≤ 30, age at first‐time dislocation (FTD) &gt;/≤ 12 years, age at time of TP &gt; / ≤ 20 years, time from FTD to TP &gt; / ≤ 2 years, subsequent surgery, patello‐femoral cartilage lesions International Cartilage Research Society (ICRS) Grade ≥ 3 at the time of surgery, previous patella stabilising surgery and/or post‐operative lateral trochlea inclination (LTI) ≤ 11 deg. Outcomes were the Kujala, Knee injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS) and Lysholm scores, collected prior to and at 1 and 2 years after TP. Results From 2011 to 2021, 368 Bereiter TPs were performed on 324 patients (99 males, 225 females, 44 bilateral) by four dedicated surgeons. Patients with a BMI &gt; 30 had better mean improvement (7.6–13.8 points, p &lt; 0.05) in all PROM scores except KOOS quality of life (QoL). Patients who underwent subsequent surgery reported lower mean improvements in Kujala, Lysholm, KOOS Pain, KOOS Sport and KOOS QoL (5.2–12.5 points, p &lt; 0.05). Conclusions Mean improvement in outcome 2 years after Bereiter TP for high‐grade TD was positively influenced by BMI &gt; 30 kg/m 2 and negatively influenced by the need for subsequent surgery. Age at the first patella dislocation, time between first dislocation and surgery, age at time of TP &gt;/≤ 20 years, time from FTD to TP &gt;/≤ 2 years, patella‐femoral cartilage lesions ICRS Grade ≥ 3, previous patella stabilising surgery, and post‐operative LTI ≤ 11 deg. did not influence the mean improvement. Level of Evidence Level II.

A significant portion of the population is affected by nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). Unfortunately, there are no particular pharmacological treatments that have been approved for it. This study aimed to investigate the protective effect of ethyl gallate against NAFLD induced by a high-fat diet in mice. By using a high-fat diet for 16 weeks, the NAFLD model was created in mice. Two oral doses of ethyl gallate (20 mg/kg and 40 mg/kg) were given. The liver injury was assessed by the liver index, along with serum evaluations of liver functions and lipid profiles. A histopathology study was also performed. Triglyceride (TG) and sterol regulatory element-binding protein 1C (SREBP-1C) levels in the liver were also measured, and the liver's oxidative stress and inflammation were assessed. The results demonstrated that ethyl gallate could mitigate the liver injury, particularly when it was administered at the high dose. It resulted in a reduction in both the liver index and NAFLD activity score. In addition, it improved significantly the liver function and reduced serum TG levels. Furthermore, by decreasing the liver levels of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) and nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB), ethyl gallate showed an anti-inflammatory effect, and it also could reduce oxidative stress. Moreover, the high dose of ethyl gallate reduced the hepatic TG and SREBP-1C levels. In conclusion, by controlling lipid metabolism, lowering oxidative stress, and suppressing the NF-κB signaling pathway, ethyl gallate provides protection against NAFLD.

ABSTRACT Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) disproportionately affects postmenopausal women, who are at an increased risk of developing RA and experience higher RA‐related mortality compared to premenopausal women. This study examines trends in RA‐related mortality among U.S. postmenopausal women aged 55 and older from 1999 to 2023. We explored disparities in mortality by race/ethnicity, region, and age, and projected future mortality rates through 2030. Data were sourced from the CDC WONDER database, with RA‐related deaths identified using ICD‐10 codes M05 and M06. Age‐adjusted mortality rates (AAMRs) were calculated via direct standardization, and trends were analyzed using Joinpoint regression to estimate annual percentage change (APC). During the study period, there were 42,497 RA‐related deaths. Overall, AAMRs declined significantly from 5.75 to 2.51 per 100,000 (AAPC: −3.53), though a temporary increase was observed during the COVID‐19 pandemic. The highest mortality rates were observed among non‐Hispanic White women, followed by Hispanic or Latino, non‐Hispanic Black, and other racial groups. Geographically, the Midwest and West had the highest AAMRs, while the Northeast reported the lowest. Women aged 85 and older consistently exhibited the highest mortality across all age groups. Projections suggest that the downward trend in mortality will continue, with AAMRs expected to reach 1.55 per 100,000 by 2030. Despite the overall decline, significant disparities persist by race/ethnicity, region, and age, highlighting the need for targeted interventions to address inequities in healthcare access and outcomes.

Abstract Background: Breast cancer is the most common malignancy among women, posing major health, social, and economic challenges worldwide. This study analyzed global breast cancer incidence and mortality in 2022 using Global Cancer Observatory (GLOBOCAN) 2022 data and projected the disease burden to 2050. Methods: Breast cancer incidence and mortality were categorized by region and age. Correlations between age-standardized rates (ASRs) and the Human Development Index (HDI) were assessed using Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient (ρ). Future burden estimates for 2050 were projected based on current trends. Results: In 2022, approximately 2.30 million new breast cancer cases and 666,103 deaths were reported globally. Age-specific patterns of breast cancer incidence and mortality differed across development HDI levels with incidence peaking at ages 45–69 years and mortality at ages 50–≥85 years across HDI levels. The proportion of cases and deaths among women aged ≥50 years relative to those aged ≤49 years increased with HDI, ranging from 79% vs . 21% for incidence and 90% vs . 10% for deaths in very high HDI countries to 51% vs . 49% and 59% vs . 41% in low HDI countries. HDI showed strong positive correlations with age-standardized incidence rates (ρ = 0.773), period incidence rates (ρ = 0.958), and period mortality rates (ρ = 0.907), and a negative correlation with mortality-to-incidence ratios (ρ = –0.817). Projections indicate that by 2050, breast cancer cases may rise to 3.55 million and deaths to 1.14 million if current patterns continue. Conclusions: Breast cancer remains a major global health concern. Strengthening prevention, early detection, and therapeutic strategies is essential to reduce incidence, improve survival, and alleviate its global burden.

In the context of Vietnam's efforts to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), improving the quality of the healthcare workforce, particularly in the pharmacy sector, plays a foundational role. This article analyzes the role of educational accreditation as a strategic tool for training a generation of pharmacists who meet the demands of sustainable development. Using a literature review method and analyzing policy documents, the paper clarifies the multidimensional relationship between accreditation of pharmacy training programs and the implementation of these goals, particularly Sustainable Development Goal 3 (Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages). The study indicates that, despite encouraging results (with 22 accredited pharmacy training programs by September 2024), the biggest challenge remains the shift from a “compliance” mindset to the creation of a true “quality culture” in training institutions, along with challenges related to resource limitations and the applicability of accreditation standards. Based on this, the paper proposes coordinated solutions involving government authorities, educational institutions, and society to improve the effectiveness of accreditation efforts, contributing to national healthcare security and promoting sustainable development.

Introduction: Functional independence is a key developmental milestone for adolescents with Down syndrome (DS), yet evidence from low- and middle-income countries examining community-based influences on daily living abilities remains scarce. POTADS, a parent-led organization in Indonesia, provides emotional, informational, and instrumental support, but its direct impact on adolescents' functional independence has not been empirically evaluated.Objectives: To analyze the association between POTADS community support and independence in activities of daily living (ADL) among adolescents with DS in an urban Indonesian setting.Methods: A cross-sectional study was conducted among 53 adolescents aged 11–18 years who were active members of POTADS. Community support was measured using a modified social support scale, and ADL independence was assessed using the adapted self-care domain of the Pediatric Evaluation of Disability Inventory. Data were analyzed using Spearman's rho due to non-normal distribution. Results: Nearly all parents reported high levels of community support (98%), whereas most adolescents reported high levels of ADL independence (89%). A statistical analysis revealed no significant association between community support and ADL independence (rₛ = –0.156; p = 0.264). Minimal variability in responses and ceiling effects may explain the lack of correlation. Conclusions: POTADS community support was not directly associated with ADL independence in this study. Nonetheless, the community may provide indirect benefits, such as empowerment for parents. Including skill-focused, family-based training in nursing and community initiatives could potentially improve adolescents' functional independence.

Purpose: Individuals with temporomandibular disorder (TMD), especially Group I, have a reduced quality of life (QoL). This study examines the relationship between the individual, physical, and psychosocial characteristics of individuals with Group I TMD and their QoL. Methods: The study was conducted with 73 participants aged 18-65 years and diagnosed with Group I TMD. Their individual (age, gender, education level, duration of TMD-related complaints), physical [joint sounds, pressure pain threshold (PPT), jaw muscle strength, temporomandibular joint range of motion (ROM), cervical ROM, pain intensity], and psychosocial characteristics (mental status) and QoL were evaluated. Pain intensity, mental status, and QoL were assessed using a numerical pain scale, the General Health Questionnaire-28 (GHQ-28), and Short Form-36, respectively. Results: Education level showed the greatest association with QoL among individual characteristics (r=0.243-0.336; p<0.05). PPT was weakly associated with some QoL parameters (r=0.238-0.278; p<0.05). The right excursion muscle strength was associated with many parameters of QoL (r=0.236-0.403; p<0.05). Only the maximum overbite ROM was related to general health (r=0.244; p<0.05). Pain intensity was the most associated with all parameters of QoL (r=-0.302 – -0.556; p<0.01). A correlation was revealed between the GHQ-28 and emotional well-being (r=-0.231; p<0.01) and energy/vitality (r=-0.364; p<0.05). Conclusion: To improve the QoL of individuals with TMD, biopsychosocial factors related to QoL should be taken into account during rehabilitation. Modifying pain-related beliefs and behaviors, along with pain and stress management interventions, would be beneficial in addition to physical modalities and exercise approaches.

The ICOPE framework is broadly compatible with Korea's integrated care strategies, especially at the micro level. Macro-level implementation gaps persist. This study's findings, particularly identified consensus priorities and policy-practice gaps, aim to directly inform future policy design and scale-up strategies for integrated care in Korea, guiding efforts in governance integration, ICT infrastructure development, and indicator standardization.

The complement cascade is an evolutionarily ancient system of soluble and cell bound proteins. Activation of the system triggers sequential proteolytic steps that rapidly generate downstream protein fragments, several of which have biologic activity. The complement system can directly lyse invasive pathogens, and it engages other cellular and molecular components of the immune system. In some contexts, complement also has counterregulatory immune effects and can dampen inflammation. Beyond its role in immunity, the complement cascade facilitates the clearance of injured cells and debris and can initiate tissue repair programs. Recent research has also shown that cleavage of complement proteins within cells mediates homeostatic functions and signaling pathways. Although the complement system plays an essential role in protecting the host from infection, inappropriate or uncontrolled complement activation mediates tissue inflammation across a large spectrum of autoimmune, inflammatory, and degenerative diseases. Complement inhibitory drugs have been developed to prevent these maladaptive effects, and several of these drugs have been approved for clinical use. These drugs block an arm of the immune system that is not directly affected by other immunosuppressive agents. Given the diverse functions of complement, its role in disease, and the development of anti-complement drugs, complement biology will remain an important topic of research in the foreseeable future.

Introduction: Adolescence is a critical period of growth and development in which nutritional status and health behaviors play an important role in determining future health outcomes. Rapid lifestyle changes and increased consumption of packaged foods have contributed to rising nutritional problems among adolescents, including obesity and other non-communicable diseases. Understanding nutrition information on food labels is therefore essential to support healthy food choices and improve adolescents’ nutritional knowledge. Objective: Adolescents tend to consume packaged foods high in salt, sugar, and fat. One of the contributing factor is their low comprehension of the display of nutrition facts on the packaging and the habit of not reading them. Data from the Lampung Health Office show that the prevalence of obesity among school-aged children increased from 27% to 37% in 2021 and 2023. Reading nutrition facts is part of the Balanced Nutrition Guidelines. This study aims to analyze the effect of nutrition education using animated video media on knowledge and reading comprehension of nutrition facts on packaged foods among eight-grade adolescents at SMPN 2 Bukit Kemuning, Lampung Utara. Method: The study used a quantitative pre-experimental with a one-group pretest- posttest design. Nutrition education was delivered through animated video media, followed by measurement of knowledge and comprehension with a 14-days interval between the pretest and posttest. The study population consisted of 104 eight-grade students. Using a simple random sampling method, 84 samples were selected. However,the intervention was given to entire population to avoid sample loss, resulting in 85 samples collected. Data were analyzed using the Paired Sample T- Test. Result: The results showed a significant increase in the average score knowledge score from 64.05 to 89.07. And in reading comprehension from 59.34 to 85.53. Statitical tests showed a p-value &lt;0.05 for both variables, indicating that nutrition education using animated video media had significant effect on improving adolescents knowledge and comprehension of reading nutrition facts.

Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) is a major and potentially life-threatening acute complication of type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM), particularly in children and adolescents. We report a 17-year-old male who presented with severe DKA as the first manifestation of previously undiagnosed T1DM. On admission, he was profoundly acidotic, markedly hyperglycemic, hemodynamically unstable, and anuric, with rising creatinine levels. Despite appropriate resuscitation and standard DKA therapy, renal function deteriorated to stage 3 AKI according to KDIGO, leading to the initiation of renal replacement therapy. During the initial phase of dialysis, the patient experienced several episodes of hypoglycemia, requiring insulin dose adjustment and closer glucose monitoring. Renal function gradually improved and patient was discharged in stable condition. This case highlights that DKA as the initial presentation of type 1 DM in adolescents can progress to severe AKI requiring dialysis, and emphasizes the importance of careful monitoring of renal function and glycemic management during renal replacement therapy in pediatric patients.

Diabetes mellitus, a chronic metabolic disorder marked by persistent hyperglycemia, often requires multifaceted therapeutic approaches. Although Arthrospira platensis&nbsp;exhibits antihyperglycemic properties, its bioactive compounds have limited bioavailability. This study synthesized selenium-functionalized A. platensis&nbsp;nanoparticles (Se-APNPs) using Na₂SeO₃ and evaluated their effects in diabetic mice. Arthrospira platensis&nbsp;powdered (raw material)&nbsp;(AP-P), Se-APNPs (10% and 20% v/v), infused AP-P (10% v/v), and glibenclamide were tested following diabetes induction via alloxan. The 10% Se-APNPs significantly lowered fasting glucose (84 mg/dL), outperforming glibenclamide, while infused AP-P showed superior wound healing (94.5%), comparable to the drug (96.6%). Growth performance was optimal in the 10% Se-APNP group, but higher concentrations indicated potential testicular toxicity. These findings highlight Se-APNPs as a promising approach for glycemic regulation and metabolic improvement, with infused AP-P excelling in wound repair. Dose optimization is crucial for maximizing efficacy and minimizing toxicity.

Bilişim teknolojisi hızlı bir şekilde ilerlemektedir. Bilişim araçları, ilmî çalışmalarda bilgiye hızlı erişimi sağlama, küresel çapta kişiler arası iletişimi kolaylaştırma ve daha birçok alanda önemli faydalar sağlamaktadır. Ancak bilişim araçları, bu araçların kötü niyetli kişiler tarafından farklı amaçlarla kullanılması, bağımlılık, zaman israfı ve siber zorbalık gibi ciddi sorunları da beraberinde getirmektedir. Bilişim alanındaki gelişmeler, medeniyete önemli imkânlar sunmakla birlikte, siber zorbalık gibi ciddi hukuki ve sosyal sorunlara da yol açmaktadır. Siber zorbalık, fiziksel zorbalığın dijital ortamlara taşınmasıyla ortaya çıkan ve 21. yüzyılın bilgi ve dijital çağında sanal etkileşim alanlarında kendini gösteren bir zorbalık türüdür. İslâm hukukunda siber zorbalık ile ilgili önleyici ve caydırıcı tedbirlerin tesis edilmesi bu alanda önemli bir hukuki boşluğa çare olacaktır. Bu bağlamda siber zorbalık, bazı ülkeler tarafından incelenmiş ve çözümüne ilişkin yeni kanunlar çıkarılmış veya merî hukuktaki kanunların hükümlerinin kapsamlarına dâhil edilmiştir. İslam ceza hukukunda bu suçun hukuki boyutunun ortaya konulması gerektiği ortadadır. İslam’da insanın şeref, ırz, itibar ve duygularına ya da manevi değerlerine yapılacak her türlü saldırı manevi zarar olarak değerlendirilmektedir. Siber zorbalığın tehdit, hakaret ve rencide edici mesaj ya da resimleri yaymak şeklinde gerçekleşen fiilleri manevi zarar ile ilişkilendirilebilir. Ancak bazı siber zorbalık türleri ise kişinin maddi olarak zarar görmesine de sebep olabilir. Gerçekleşme şekilleri göz önüne alındığında, yeni ihdas edilen bu suçun, kısas, had ve ta‘zîr cezaları bağlamında ele alınabileceği anlaşılmaktadır. Bu çalışma, siber zorbalığın sonuçlarını ve bunlara ilişkin cezai müeyyideleri İslam hukuku perspektifinden incelemeyi amaçlamaktadır

Household and ambient air pollution (HAAP), a major global health risk, is linked to a lower quality of life and is responsible for over six million premature deaths globally each year. We investigate country-level socioeconomic, environmental, energy, and health determinants of HAAP mortality rates, using regression analyses and global mapping of predicted probabilities of high HAAP mortality risk. While related studies are predominantly country-specific based on micro-level factors, our study provides global evidence from 150 countries based on a broad range of macro-level indicators. Our findings reveal that greater rural access to clean cooking fuels and technology and increased healthcare expenditures are critical for reducing HAAP deaths, whereas rurality and energy deprivation significantly increase such mortality risks. While advanced economies demonstrate clear resilience to HAAP mortality risks, emerging and developing economies are disproportionately vulnerable. Contrary to related literature, our analyses also reveal that males are more at risk of HAAP mortality than females. We further contextualise our global evidence with previous country-specific case studies on HAAP risks. Our research helps to appraise the progress towards achieving the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals 3, 5, and 7, addressing their associated targets and indicators, providing guidance for policymakers to strengthen efforts to reduce HAAP mortality and improve living conditions globally.

Background: Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) frequently coexists with hypertension, significantly heightening cardiovascular and renal risks. While both conditions are prevalent, their interrelationship – particularly the influence of glycemic control on hypertension incidence – remains underexplored in regional Indian populations. Aims and Objectives: To evaluate the correlation between glycemic control (measured by hemoglobin [HbA1c]) and hypertension in T2DM patients, and assess the influence of age, gender, body mass index (BMI), diabetes duration, comorbidities, and lifestyle factors. Materials and Methods: This cross-sectional study enrolled 250 T2DM patients at Maharani Laxmi Bai Medical College, Jhansi, from July 2024 to April 2025. Data on demographic, clinical, biochemical, and lifestyle parameters were collected. Blood pressure was categorized using JNC 8 criteria, and HbA1c levels were used to stratify glycemic control. Statistical associations were analyzed using Statistical Package for Social Sciences v21, with P&lt;0.05 considered significant. Results: Out of 250 patients, 170 (68%) were hypertensive. Poor glycemic control (HbA1c &gt;8.5%) was significantly associated with hypertension (P=0.03). Other significant associations included higher BMI (P=0.02), longer diabetes duration (P=0.02), dyslipidemia (P=0.01), and smoking (P=0.04). Hypertension prevalence increased progressively with HbA1c levels and duration of diabetes. Conclusion: Hypertension is highly prevalent among T2DM patients and is strongly associated with poor glycemic control. Integrated management strategies targeting both glycemia and blood pressure are essential to reduce cardiovascular risks in diabetic populations.

Abstract Background Artificial intelligence (AI)-derived electrocardiographic aging (ECG-aging) has been found to be associated with the risk of atrial fibrillation (AF). Objectives We aimed to assess the causal association between the discrepancy in AI-predicted electrocardiographic age and chronological age (AI-ECG age gap) and AF risk. Methods We analyzed 12-lead ECGs in UK Biobank to derive the AI-ECG age gap using our latest AI-based age prediction model. Associations between measured ECG-aging and genetically predicted ECG-aging based on a genetic risk score (GRS) were evaluated in relation to AF using multivariable regression and Mendelian randomization (MR). MR analyses incorporated GRS-based individual-level data and summary-level genome-wide association study (GWAS) data from large external consortia, with causal estimates obtained using inverse-variance weighting and complementary sensitivity methods. Mediation MR was additionally performed to assess intermediary causal pathways. Results Each 1-SD increase in the AI-ECG age gap was associated with an increased risk of AF in observational analyses (HR 1.43 [95% CI, 1.29–1.59]) and GRS-based MR (OR 1.06 [95% CI, 1.01–1.12]). Two-sample MR analyses in two large, independent GWAS datasets replicated these findings (OR 1.13 [95% CI, 1.02–1.25] in both), with multiple sensitivity analyses confirming robustness. Bidirectional MR suggested potential reverse causation from AF to ECG-aging. Non-linear MR demonstrated a consistent positive association across the AI-ECG age gap spectrum. Mediation MR further identified heart failure as a key intermediary, accounting for approximately 70% of the total causal effect of ECG-aging on AF. Conclusion This study provides genetic evidence supporting a causal association between ECG-aging and the risk of AF. These findings highlight ECG-aging as a causally relevant and clinically informative biomarker for AF that may help identify individuals at increased risk.

Introduction: Antifibrotic therapies are widely used in both idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) and progressive pulmonary fibrosis (PPF). We aim to compare the demographic, clinical characteristics, and long-term outcomes of IPF and PPF patients on antifibrotic treatment at 6-month and 1-year follow-ups. Methods and Materials: This was a retrospective single-center cohort study. Between January 2021 and January 2025, patients who initiated antifibrotic therapy were retrospectively included. Pulmonary function tests were recorded before treatment, at baseline, and at 6-month and 1-year follow-up visits. Additionally, baseline 6-minute walk test results and radiological data were also documented. Results: A total of 117 cases were included in the study, consisting of 76 IPF and 41 PPF. IPF patients were statistically significantly older than PPF patients ( P &lt; 0.001). The proportion of females was higher in the PPF group ( P &lt; 0.001). 52% of the cases used pirfenidone, while 48% used nintedanib. The most common subtype of PPF was connective tissue disease-associated ILD (48.8%), followed by nonspecific interstitial pneumonia (34.1%), and hypersensitivity pneumonitis (17.1%). In the PPF group, basal, 6-month, and 1-year follow-up FVC and DLCO values were statistically significantly lower compared to the IPF group. However, in both the IPF and PPF groups, no significant loss was observed in FVC and DLCO when comparing the 6-month and 1-year follow-up data with baseline values. No significant difference in mortality was found between the IPF and PPF groups. Conclusions: Antifibrotic treatments showed a similar effect profile for both IPF and PPF. Our findings suggest that PPF patients with lower baseline pulmonary function require closer monitoring for early detection of progression.

ABSTRACT Objectives Our study aims to retrospectively analyze the combined effects of closed continuous irrigation drainage technique (CCIDT) and narrative nursing on recovery, anxiety, and quality of life in ultra‐low rectal cancer (ULRC) patients undergoing anus‐preserving operation. Methods A total of 224 ULRC patients were analyzed with four groups: conventional drainage with routine care (Group A), conventional drainage with narrative nursing (Group B), irrigated drainage with routine care (Group C), and irrigated drainage with narrative nursing (Group D). The outcome assessment included the first postoperative exhaust time, drainage tube placement time, and length of stay. Anxiety levels were measured using the Generalized Anxiety Disorder‐7 scale, and quality of life was assessed using the EORTC QLQ‐C30 questionnaire. Results The CCIDT significantly shortened the first postoperative exhaust time, drainage tube placement time, and length of stay compared to conventional drainage techniques ( p &lt; 0.001 for all comparisons). However, CCIDT did not significantly affect the occurrence of anastomotic fistulas or abdominal infections. Narrative nursing significantly reduced anxiety levels ( p &lt; 0.001) and improved quality of life ( p &lt; 0.001). However, narrative nursing did not influence the incidence of anastomotic fistulas or abdominal infections. The combination of CCIDT and narrative nursing effectively enhances postoperative recovery, reduces anxiety, and improves quality of life in ULRC patients.

These findings highlight the need to incorporate chronotype assessment into post-transplant care. Interventions should emphasize circadian rhythm regulation, stress reduction, disruption of maladaptive rumination, and sleep improvement to prevent depressive symptoms among kidney transplant recipients.

With demographic ageing, the demand for specialised imaging grows. Innovative technologies, particularly artificial intelligence (AI), promise to improve the accuracy and availability of diagnostic imaging for older adults. The authors conducted a narrative review of the literature on the AI-enabled imaging and analysed anonymised data from Lux Med’s electronic records to identify current AI applications and their impact on diagnostic throughput and accuracy. The AI-based tools are increasingly used in radiology. Compared with traditional workflows, algorithms can detect lesions more precisely and quickly, automate image analysis, shorten waiting times, reduce diagnostic errors and optimise resource use. These efficiencies help to lower costs, broaden access in settings with few specialists and improve patient comfort — especially important for older patients with limited mobility. However, AI also raises ethical and legal concerns around data protection and liability, and adoption requires training and clinician buy-in. The AI offers clear benefits for imaging diagnostics in older adults by accelerating and improving diagnosis while potentially reducing costs and increasing access. Realising these benefits will depend on addressing regulatory and technological challenges and ensuring medical staff are supported in adopting these tools. Future work should evaluate long-term outcomes of the AI-guided diagnostics on treatment effectiveness in elderly populations.

This study was conducted to examine the effects of nurses' use of uniforms and other external appearance elements on patient perceptions. The study was conducted as a descriptive cross-sectional study. The study population consisted of 467 patients who attended to two different hospitals for various reasons, had no communication problems, and were willing to participate in the study. Data were collected between August 10 and 30, 2024, using the Participant Information Form and the Questionnaire Form. Among the participants, 75.6% were female, 76.7% held a university degree, 69.4% were unemployed, and 19.4% were employed as civil servants. Among the participants, 61% reported that the nurse's external appearance affected them, 41.8% felt more secure when the nurse wore a white uniform, 72.4% preferred the nurse to wear a uniform or a uniform with an apron, 61% stated that the nurse's external appearance positively affected treatment and care, and 64.7% were negatively affected by the care provided by a nurse without a uniform. Conclusion: The appearance of nurses significantly affects patients' trust in the nurses who provide care and treatment.

Latar Belakang: Kesehatan mental merupakan komponen integral dalam menjaga homeostasis tubuh, termasuk fungsi dan struktur jaringan di rongga mulut. Gangguan seperti stres dan depresi dapat memicu perubahan biologis melalui aktivasi sistem saraf otonom, pelepasan hormon stres seperti kortisol, serta penurunan imunitas. Kajian ini untuk menganalisis hubungan antara gangguan kesehatan mental terhadap respons biologis oral berdasarkan bukti ilmiah terkini. Metode: kajian literatur terhadap artikel ilmiah terbitan 2020–2025 yang diperoleh dari basis data PubMed, ScienceDirect, dan Google Scholar, dengan fokus pada manifestasi oral seperti bruxism, xerostomia, dan periodontitis. Hasil: menunjukkan bahwa kondisi psikologis negatif berkorelasi terhadap peningkatan inflamasi jaringan periodontal, gangguan sekresi saliva, dan disregulasi imun oral. Kesimpulan: Temuan ini menegaskan adanya keterkaitan fisiologis antara kesehatan mental terhadap fungsi biologis rongga mulut yang perlu dipahami dalam kerangka interdisipliner.

<ns3:p>Background The global age-standardised suicide rate is estimated at 8.9/100 000, while South Africa is at 23.5/100 000. The prehospital Emergency Medical Services is located within this burden of health. Emergency Care providers have a duty to assess, treat and transport healthcare consumers with suicidality, when attending to the suicide caseload. The aim was to appraise suicidality case frequency and typology and estimate the scope of the challenge faced by a jurisdictional emergency medical service and its care providers. Methods Using a retrospective cross-sectional design and a novel data collection instrument, a census of three years of Ambulance Incident Management Records was undertaken in a rural district of the Western Cape, South Africa. Results Of 413,712 records, 2,976 (N) mental health-related incidents were sampled. Fourteen percent (n = 412) were assessed to have descriptors of suicidal ideation (n = 227), attempted suicide (n = 83) or death by suicide (n = 102). There were, on average, 2.8 deaths by suicide per month over the 3-year study period in the Garden Route District. Women were reported to mostly ingest poison and overdose on medication, while men used strangulation and were 5 times more likely to die by suicide than women. Conclusion This study estimates the prehospital suicide and suicidality burden for the Western Cape Government Emergency Medical Services, elucidating an under-researched health concern within the South African prehospital space. Further study is required on the risk of emergency care provider stigmatisation towards suicide and suicidality cases, while auditing the need to assess policy, praxis, medical surveillance, EC provider clinical capacity and victim needs and experiences. Suicidality and suicide in Southern Africa could require a ‘Syndemic’ approach for the emergency service to interrupt suicidality and advance professional relevance.</ns3:p>

PANDAS syndrome (Pediatric Autoimmune Neuropsychiatric Disorders Associated with Streptococcal infections) is a neuroimmunological disorder in children, linked to autoimmune reactions following an infection with group A beta-hemolytic streptococcus. Symptoms include anxiety, irritability, aggression, sleep disturbances, sudden food selectivity, obsessive-compulsive behavior, and tics. Parents are often confused by the abrupt behavioral changes, failing to associate them with streptococcal infections such as pharyngitis and tonsillitis, which can act as triggers for this syndrome. Diagnosis is based on clinical presentation, history of streptococcal infections, and laboratory tests (throat swab, ASO titers). An otorhinolaryngologist conducts treatment with antibiotics, and for children with recurrent infections or tonsillar hypertrophy, tonsillectomy may be recommended according to ISKRA guidelines. Post-tonsillectomy care focuses on parental education, postoperative pain management, and early recognition of complications. Nursing interventions are essential in postoperative care, pain relief, infection prevention, and the management of postoperative complications, as well as providing emotional support to the family. PANDAS syndrome requires a multidisciplinary approach, involving otorhinolaryngologists, pediatricians, immunologists, psychiatrists, nurses and medical technicians. Timely diagnosis and treatment are essential for reducing neuropsychiatric symptoms and improving the child’s quality of life.

Kebersihan menstruasi merupakan bagian penting dari kesehatan reproduksi remaja perempuan. Kurangnya pengetahuan dan perilaku yang tepat selama menstruasi dapat meningkatkan risiko infeksi saluran reproduksi dan gangguan kesehatan lainnya. Kegiatan pengabdian masyarakat ini bertujuan untuk meningkatkan pengetahuan dan kesadaran siswi SMPN 25 Pesawaran tentang manajemen kebersihan menstruasi (MHM) melalui edukasi interaktif. Metode yang digunakan adalah penyuluhan, diskusi, dan simulasi praktik kebersihan menstruasi dengan media leaflet dan alat peraga higiene kit. Evaluasi dilakukan menggunakan pre-test dan post-test terhadap 30 siswi. Hasil kegiatan menunjukkan adanya peningkatan rata-rata pre-test berada pada kategori cukup (rentang nilai 5–7), sedangkan post-test menunjukkan peningkatan signifikan dengan mayoritas responden mencapai nilai 9–10. Diketahui sebanyak 83% anak mengalami peningkatan pengetahuan terkait pentingnya kebersihan reproduksi. Peserta menunjukkan antusiasme yang tinggi, ditandai dengan peningkatan partisipasi aktif dalam diskusi dan praktik langsung penggunaan pembalut yang benar. Kegiatan ini berhasil meningkatkan pemahaman dan perilaku positif dalam menjaga kebersihan reproduksi remaja. Diharapkan kegiatan serupa dapat diterapkan secara berkala di sekolah lain untuk mendukung program kesehatan reproduksi remaja di wilayah kerja Puskesmas Pesawaran

CEUS and O-RADS US both exhibit high sensitivity in differentiating ovarian or adnexal masses, with CEUS also demonstrating very high specificity.

Şirketler topluluğu TTK 195 vd. maddelerinde ayrıntılı bir şekilde ele alınmaktadır. Hakimiyetin nasıl kurulacağı açıklandıktan sonra hakim ve bağlı şirketin hak ve yükümlülükleri düzenlenmektedir. Bu yükümlülüklerden biri de hakim teşebbüsün belli bazı pay oranlarına ulaşması ya da bu pay oranlarının altına düşmesi halinde bu durumu bağlı sermaye şirketine ve TTK ile diğer kanunlarda gösterilen yetkili makamlara bildirmesini, meydana gelen değişikliğin tescilini ve ilanını düzenleyen TTK m. 198’dir. Bu yükümlülüğün yerine getirilmemesi pay sahipliği haklarından doğan hakların donması gibi önemli bazı sonuçların ortaya çıkmasına yol açabilmektedir. Özellikle şirketler topluluğunda bulunan bağlı şirketin merkezinin yurtdışında bulunması halinde bu yükümlülüğün yerine getirilmesinin önünde bazı yasal ve fiili engellerin bulunduğu, bu husus gözetilmeden mevzuatta öngörülen yaptırımların uygulanmasının kanunun amacına ve hakkaniyet ilkesine aykırı olacağı değerlendirilmiştir.

Nghiên cứu 30 bệnh nhân nhồi máu não diện rộng được phẫu thuật mở sọ giảm áp từ tháng 1 năm 2019 đến tháng 1 năm 2025 tại Bệnh viện Đại học Y Hà Nội. Tuổi trung bình là 59,1 ± 11,2; tỉ lệ nam/nữ là 2,75/1; điểm NIHSS trung bình trước phẫu thuật là 18,4 ± 3,0; toàn bộ bệnh nhân có điểm ASPECTS ≤ 5. Cắt lớp vi tính: 76,7% bệnh nhân có di lệch đường giữa &lt; 10 mm, 23,3% vượt quá 10 mm. Ra viện: 90% bệnh nhân sống, tử vong 10%. 27 bệnh nhân sau 6 tháng: 55,6% đạt kết quả chức năng tốt (mRS 0–3) và 44,4% có kết quả xấu (mRS 4–6). Phẫu thuật mở sọ giảm áp ở bệnh nhân nhồi máu não diện rộng là một phương pháp khả thi, an toàn với tỷ lệ tử vong thấp sau phẫu thuật.

The simulation-based approach expands the range of methods for assessing intraocular lenses. By providing realistic images, it allows both ophthalmologists and patients to more intuitively understand the aspects of these lenses. The simulation derives visual predictions from a purely mathematical model, thus bridging the gap from technology to clinical application.

<title>Abstract</title> Background The prognostic value of the triglyceride-glucose (TyG) index across different renal function strata remains unclear. The study explores the association between the TyG index and major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE) in acute coronary syndrome (ACS) patients at different eGFR levels. Methods A total of 1038 patients with ACS were analyzed, and 241 composite events were recorded during the follow-up. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis and the Cox proportional hazard model were used to determine the relationship between TyG index and the incidence of MACE. Results Patients in the highest TyG index tertile (TyG ≥ 9.25) presented a higher median age, male predominance, and greater prevalence of STEMI and UA. The TyG index was an independent predictor of MACE, with a progressively higher MACE incidence observed across ascending TyG tertiles. The restricted cubic spline analysis showed a linear association between the TyG index and MACE risk in the unadjusted model and a J-shaped association after multivariate adjustment. Notably, this association was present in patients with impaired renal function (eGFR &lt; 60 mL/min/1.73m <sup>2</sup> ), where the risk of MACE increased by 43% for every one standard deviation increase in TyG index (HR 1.43, 95% CI: 1.05–1.95, <italic>P</italic> = 0.025). However, this relationship was not observed in patients with preserved renal function. Conclusion Elevated TyG index is an independent risk factor for MACE, particularly in patients with renal impairment. These findings suggests that the TyG index is a valuable clinical marker for cardiovascular risk stratification, especially in patients with renal insufficiency.

ABSTRACT Background Gynecologic neuroendocrine carcinomas (NECs) are rare, highly aggressive malignancies with early metastatic potential and limited evidence to guide optimal management across different primary sites. Aims To characterize the clinicopathological features, treatment patterns, survival outcomes, and prognostic factors of gynecologic NECs (cervix, endometrium, and ovary) treated at a single tertiary center over a 10‐year period. Materials and Methods This observational, single‐center retrospective cohort study included patients diagnosed with gynecologic NEC at Women's Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, between January 2013 and August 2023. Clinicopathological data, treatment modalities, recurrence, and follow‐up outcomes were collected. Progression‐free survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) were estimated using Kaplan–Meier methods. Prognostic factors were assessed using log‐rank tests and multivariable Cox proportional hazards models. Results A total of 52 patients were identified, of whom 78.8% had cervical NEC. Primary surgery was performed in 90.4% of patients; adjuvant chemotherapy and radiotherapy were administered in 65.4% and 51.9%, respectively. Among cervical NEC cases with HPV testing, 69.7% were HPV16/18‐positive. Immunohistochemical (IHC) showed high positivity for synaptophysin (95.3%) and chromogranin A (72.7%); Ki‐67 exceeded 50% in 89.1% of evaluated cases. Median PFS for cervical NEC was 29 months; stage I cervical NEC showed a 5‐year PFS of 51.6% and 5‐year OS of 68.4%. Poorer prognosis was associated with FIGO stage ≥ IB3, mixed neuroendocrine‐non‐neuroendocrine neoplasm (MiNEN) with squamous cell carcinoma, tumor size &gt; 4 cm, and lymph node metastasis. On multivariable analysis of cervical NEC, MiNEN with squamous cell carcinoma remained an independent predictor of reduced PFS (HR = 6.97, 95% CI: 1.60–30.31; p = 0.010). Discussion Despite multimodal treatment, gynecologic NECs showed poor outcomes. The identification of MiNEN with squamous cell carcinoma as an independent adverse factor for PFS suggests histologic composition may meaningfully affect prognosis and warrants validation in larger, multicenter cohorts. Conclusion Cervical NEC was the predominant subtype, most patients underwent surgery with adjuvant therapy, and survival was strongly stage‐dependent. MiNEN with squamous cell carcinoma independently predicted worse PFS, highlighting a potential high‐risk subgroup and reinforcing the need for multicenter prospective studies and more effective, potentially targeted treatment approaches for gynecologic NECs.

ABSTRACT Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type IV (HSAN4) is a rare neurological disorder characterized by anhidrosis and congenital insensitivity to pain caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in NTRK1. The condition develops because of dorsal root and autonomic ganglion neurodegeneration, which ultimately results in reduced sensation and autonomic neurological dysfunction. We ascertained several neuropathic patients and performed genetic testing using gene panels and exome sequencing (ES). Genetic variants were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. Thirteen families, each with a single affected individual, participated in this study. Genetic testing revealed that all patients carried disease‐causing variants in NTRK1 . We identified seven different variants within our cohort, including two novel variants (c.1922T&gt;C:p.Leu641Pro and c.1071_1072insTGCC:p.Asn358Cysfs*45). While some variants suggest a possible founder effect, the identification of new variants reflects the genetic diversity within the Saudi population. In addition to the cardinal clinical feature of HSAN4, patients exhibited various other symptoms like motor difficulties, microcephaly, recurrent hip dislocation, dystrophic nails, hypotrichosis, and various dysmorphic features. This study provides clinical information on a large number of patients, updates the prevalence and epidemiologic data in our population, and further expands the understanding of the disease's genetic and clinical spectrum within a highly consanguineous population.

Background: No-shows in ambulatory clinics negatively impact patient care, operational resources, and health outcomes. Local Problem: The average no-show rate of the local endocrinology medical practice office was consistently above its benchmark of 8%. Methods: A quality improvement project utilized Plan-Do-Study-Act cycles and Pender’s Health Promotion Model (HPM) to reduce no-shows. Interventions: Interventions included identifying no-show appointment trends, educating nurse navigators on HPM and associated guidelines, conducting telephone call outreach to patients at high risk for no-shows, and implementing holistic nurse-patient interactions. Results: Telephone call outreach had a 50.6% connection rate. No-show rates decreased from 14.9% to 13.9% over 8 weeks. Telephone calls provided insights into perceived experiences and social determinants of health factors. Conclusion: The project reaffirmed the importance of a multimodal approach and human interaction in reducing no-shows, as well as highlighting the value of nursing care, evidence-based promotion, and the incorporation of theory when implementing operational improvements.

Radix salviae miltiorrhizae (Danshen) is a perennial herb of the Lamiaceae family, widely used in Traditional Chinese Medicine due to its diverse pharmacological properties. R. salviae is one of the plants with a significant place in Traditional Chinese Medicine due to its pharmacological components. In this context, R. salviae, particularly in China and other Asian countries, has been widely used for centuries in the treatment of disorders such as Parkinson’s disease (PD); however, the active components and mechanisms beneficial in PD treatment remain unclear. The current study aims to explore the active components and molecular mechanisms of R. salviae against PD using network pharmacology and molecular docking analyses. For predicting the specific mechanism of R. salviae in PD treatment, the pharmacological components of the plant were identified using bioinformatics databases. Additionally, PD-related targets were selected using a network pharmacology analysis platform. As a result of the study, 13 key active components and 359 core targets of R. salviae were identified. R. salviae was found to share a common fundamental mechanism associated with PD. In the final stage of the network analysis, 10 potential targets were validated, and molecular docking analyses were performed between the top-scoring targets (AKT1, SRC, STAT3, CASP3, and EGFR) and the 13 components of R. salvia. To further support the docking results, 100 ns molecular dynamics simulations were conducted to evaluate the structural stability and dynamic behavior of the top ligand–target complexes. The results demonstrated that the selected active components of R. salviae may influence key genes in PD-related signaling pathways, thereby potentially contributing to PD treatment. These findings highlight the pharmacological potential of R. salviae in PD and may also guide the development of evidence-based complementary care strategies.

Background: Hashimoto&rsquo;s thyroiditis (HT) is a common autoimmune disease, especially in females. While hypothyroidism is a recognized complication, emerging evidence links HT to metabolic disturbances and increased cardiovascular risk. However, the broader systemic effects in untreated patients remain insufficiently clarified.Objectives: To assess the metabolic and cardiovascular risk profiles among women with HT, with a special emphasis on lipid parameters, insulin resistance (IR), and inflammation.Materials and Methods: This case-control study included 100 women: 50 patients with HT (25 newly diagnosed and untreated, and 25 receiving thyroid hormone replacement therapy) and 50 age-matched healthy controls. Anthropometric measures, glycemic status, lipid profile, and inflammatory markers were assessed. The evaluated indices included HOMA-IR, triglyceride/HDL-C ratio, LDL-C/HDL-C ratio, Atherogenic Index of Plasma, Lipid Comprehensive Index, and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein.Results: Patients with HT had significantly greater body mass index, fasting glucose, fasting triglyceride, LDL-C, IR, and markers of inflammation than controls (all P-values &lt; 0.001). Atherogenic risk, as measured by both AIP and LCI, was significantly elevated in greater than 90% of patients with HT, with the highest burden among untreated patients. While thyroid hormone therapy produced a degree of improvement, a number of cardiometabolic risk factors persisted at elevated levels.Conclusion:&nbsp; Female patients with HT frequently exhibit adverse metabolic and cardiovascular alterations, likely driven by chronic inflammation and thyroid dysfunction. Early screening and comprehensive management are essential, particularly for newly diagnosed and untreated women with HT.

The Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) guidelines for community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) recommend pneumococcal urinary antigen testing (UAT) for a subset of inpatients admitted with pneumonia. Despite this, UAT testing is frequently performed on inpatients who do not meet the official IDSA criteria, and current evidence regarding antibiotic de-escalation in UAT-positive cases remains inconclusive. To explore this further, we conducted a retrospective cohort study examining antibiotic de-escalation patterns among hospitalized CAP patients who underwent UAT over a 60-day period during peak respiratory illness season (November and December, 2023). Patients with positive UAT results were compared to those who had negative UAT; the primary outcome was whether a positive UAT impacted antibiotic de-escalation prescribing. A total of 268 patients were analyzed—235 UAT-negative and 33 UAT-positive. Both groups were comparable in terms of disease severity, underlying health conditions, and readmission rates. Empiric therapy targeting Pseudomonas aeruginosa (P. aeruginosa) and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) was used in 40% of patients (36% in the UAT-positive group and 46% of the UAG-negative group). The use of atypical coverage, MRSA coverage, or anti-pseudomonal β-lactams was frequently de-escalated in both cohorts (p &lt; 0.05); however, the UAT-positive group had significantly shorter durations of anti-pseudomonal therapy (p = 0.03) and anti-MRSA therapy (p = 0.02). Despite this, the UAT-positive group was more commonly given fluoroquinolones, such as levofloxacin or moxifloxacin, over narrow-spectrum β-lactams for final antibiotic coverage (p = 0.021). Overall, positive UAT appeared to support earlier discontinuation of anti-MRSA and anti-pseudomonal antibiotics; however, it did not impact fluoroquinolone use. Future antimicrobial stewardship efforts may benefit from promoting greater use of narrow-spectrum β-lactams in these patients.

Đặt vấn đề: Polyp trực tràng là bệnh lý thường gặp ở đoạn cuối của ống tiêu hóa, có thể tiến triển từ tổn thương lành tính thành ung thư nếu không được phát hiện và xử trí kịp thời. Việc xác định đặc điểm mô bệnh học của polyp đóng vai trò quan trọng trong chẩn đoán, điều trị và dự phòng ung thư đại trực tràng. Mục tiêu: Khảo sát đặc điểm mô bệnh học của polyp trực tràng ở bệnh nhân được nội soi đại trực tràng tại Bệnh viện Đa khoa Thành phố Cần Thơ. Đối tượng và phương pháp nghiên cứu: Nghiên cứu mô tả cắt ngang được thực hiện trên 90 bệnh nhân có polyp trực tràng được phát hiện qua nội soi đại trực tràng trong giai đoạn từ tháng 4 đến tháng 10 năm 2024. Dữ liệu được phân tích bằng phần mềm SPSS 20.0. Kết quả: Trong tổng số 90 bệnh nhân, polyp tân sinh chiếm tỷ lệ 88,9%, trong khi polyp không tân sinh chiếm 11,1%. Nhóm tuổi 45–59 chiếm tỷ lệ cao nhất (35,6%), tiếp theo là nhóm 60–74 tuổi (31,1%). Không ghi nhận mối liên quan có ý nghĩa thống kê giữa loại mô bệnh học và các đặc điểm nội soi (p &gt; 0,05). Kết luận: Polyp tân sinh là loại thường gặp nhất và có nguy cơ cao tiến triển ác tính. Việc tầm soát sớm, chẩn đoán chính xác và xử trí kịp thời là cần thiết nhằm hạn chế biến chứng và nguy cơ ung thư hóa

Mục tiêu: Mô tả đặc điểm lâm sàng, cận lâm sàng và nhận xét kết quả phẫu thuật u buồng trứng ở bệnh nhân vô sinh tại bệnh viện Phụ sản Trung Ương. Đối tượng nghiên cứu: Nghiên cứu mô tả hồi cứu và tiến cứu trên 50 bệnh nhân vô sinh có u buồng trứng được phẫu thuật từ 01/01/2022 đến 31/12/2024 tại bệnh viên Phụ sản Trung Ương. Kết quả: Độ tuổi trung bình 30,8 ± 5,3, chủ yếu nhóm tuổi 30 – 39 (52%), trong đó vô sinh nguyên phát chiếm 58% với thời gian vô sinh trung bình 2,41 năm, 28% bệnh nhân có tiền sử phẫu thuật ổ bụng. Kích thước u chủ yếu 5 – 10 cm (74%), tính chất giảm âm chủ yếu (56%). Phần lớn là phẫu thuật bóc u hoặc cắt u (94%) và 100% được thăm dò vô sinh kèm theo có 32% bệnh nhân có tắc VTC. Kết quả mô bệnh học chủ yếu là nang LNMTC (52%), tỷ lệ có thai sau mổ là 38%, chủ yếu sau 6 – 12 tháng phẫu thuật. Kết luận: Khối u buồng trứng ở bệnh nhân vô sinh chủ yếu là nang LNMTC, phẫu thuật bóc nang ưu tiên giúp bảo tồn khả năng sinh sản và cải thiện tình trạng vô sinh

This study established prosthesis-specific echocardiographic reference values for normal tricuspid prostheses. Values outside these ranges may indicate dysfunction, although the clinical correlation remains to be determined. These findings can enhance the postoperative monitoring of tricuspid prostheses.

Background/Objectives: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) exhibits high immune infiltration yet remains clinically aggressive. Although immune checkpoint blockade benefits a subset of patients, the molecular programs enabling concurrent immune activation and immune evasion in TNBC are not fully defined. This study aimed to identify TNBC-specific tumor-intrinsic and tumor-extrinsic molecular features that may explain this paradox. Methods: Publicly available single-cell RNA-sequencing data from primary breast tumors were analyzed to characterize subtype-specific transcriptional programs across epithelial and stromal compartments. Tumor-intrinsic findings were independently validated using bulk transcriptomic and clinical data from the METABRIC cohort. Tumor microenvironment remodeling was evaluated using multiplexed tissue imaging of TNBC tumors. Functional analyses were done included Gene Ontology enrichment, Hallmark gene set enrichment analysis, and SERPINB3-centered protein–protein interaction network analysis using STRING. Results: Single-cell analysis identified SERPINB3 as a TNBC-enriched epithelial gene relative to ER+ and HER2+ tumors. This subtype-restricted pattern was validated in the METABRIC cohort and associated with pathways related to epithelial–mesenchymal transition, interferon signaling, and antigen presentation. TNBC tumors also displayed a humoral immune signature characterized by B-cell and plasmablast enrichment, as well as ectopic immunoglobulin gene expression in cancer-associated fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and myeloid populations. Multiplex imaging revealed coordinated associations between immune suppression, stromal activation, and tumor proliferation. Network analysis placed SERPINB3 within interconnected immune-regulatory and stromal signaling modules. Conclusions: Together, these data indicate that TNBC exhibits co-existing immune activation and immune-suppressive features. The identified epithelial and stromal signatures represent candidate biomarkers that may inform future studies of immune regulation and therapeutic stratification in TNBC.

Abstract Background Placental malaria is caused by the binding of the Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1 ( Pf EMP1) protein VAR2CSA, found on the surface of infected erythrocytes, to placental tissue. Complications include maternal anaemia, low birth weight, small for gestational age and preterm delivery. Acquisition of antibodies against VAR2CSA during pregnancy has been linked to immunity against infection. Methods Pregnant Malawian women were enrolled at their first antenatal care visit at 16–28 weeks’ gestation into a trial of malaria prevention. Women with malaria infection at enrolment (n = 321) or any later point in pregnancy (n = 145) were selected. The IgG and IgM plasma levels against the VAR2CSA DBL1X-ID2a domain were measured at enrolment and delivery. Associations between the DBL1X-ID2a VAR2CSA-specific IgG and IgM antibody levels at enrolment or delivery and low birth weight, small for gestational age, maternal anaemia at delivery, and preterm delivery were assessed using logistic regression with confounder adjustment. Result Women with malaria infection at enrolment had higher antibody levels to DBL1X-ID2a than uninfected women, and these declined from enrolment to delivery. There were no significant associations between the IgG antibody level measured at enrolment and the birth outcomes of interest, but the IgG antibody level at delivery in women uninfected at enrolment was associated with a lower risk of low birth weight, adjusted odds ratio (aOR) 0.43 (95% CI 0.19–0.97) p = 0.04. Additionally, in women infected at enrolment, one log higher IgM antibodies to DBL1X-ID2a VAR2CSA at enrolment were associated with a significant 23% decrease in maternal anaemia at delivery, aOR 0.77 (95% CI 0.60–0.99), p = 0.04. Conclusion VAR2CSA-specific IgG and IgM antibodies are markers of malaria infection and protection against placental malaria outcomes.

The vermiform appendix is a vestigial organ in the human body. Inflammation of this organ is quite common leading to acute appendicitis. Globally, acute appendicitis remains one of the leading causes of surgical emergencies. Uncomplicated appendicitis (UA) on histopathological examination shows neutrophilic infiltration in the lamina propria. Here, we report a case of acute eosinophilic appendicitis (AEA) that mimicked UA but had predominantly eosinophils in lamina propria. A 63-year-old woman came with complaints of pain in the right lower abdominal quadrant and nausea for 2 days. Computed tomography showed a swollen appendix. She was diagnosed with UA and underwent appendectomy, but the final histopathological diagnosis was of an AEA. This case suggests that AEA may be misdiagnosed as UA, which is often managed with antibiotics. AEA should be suspected when there is an inadequate response to antibiotic therapy.

Background. The aim of the study is evaluate the quality and safety of the sedative effect of anesthesia in ambulant ophthalmic surgery by using continuous intravenous infusion of dexmedetomidine. Materials and Methods. Patients were randomized into groups by age (old people from 65 to 75 years old, old age 76 years, middle age, young people, children), by gender (men, women). The physical status of patients was assessed using the ASA scale and the dynamics of vegetatic activity by the Kerdo index. Sedation was assessed using the Richmond Sedation Scale RASS. Results. It was found that the difference in the frequency of adverse effects of the appointment of Dexmedetomidine clearly confirms the need to adjust the dose of Dexmedetomidine, depending on the state of the autonomic nervous system. The use of Dexmedetomidine according to the recommendations made it possible to achieve a safe level of sedation and eliminate side effects in ambulant ophthalmic surgery. Conclusions: Parenteral continuous infusion of Dexmedetomidine provides an effective level of sedation for ambulant ophthalmic surgery and maintaining patient-surgeon contact. Safety is confirmed by a low level of critical incidents, no respiratory depression at the target sedation level. The patency of the upper airways was better compared to previous experience with propofol

The menstrual cycle is an important indicator of adolescent girls' reproductive health, which can be influenced by various physiological and psychological factors. Menstrual cycle disorders include menorrhagia, oligomenorrhea, polymenorrhea, and amenorrhea, which are generally associated with ovarian dysfunction, anovulation, and luteal phase disorders. If left untreated, these disorders can have long-term impacts on adolescent fertility and quality of life. Management efforts include weight management, regular exercise, adequate rest, stress management, and a nutritious diet. This study aims to determine the factors associated with the menstrual cycle in adolescent girls at MAN 1, Gorontalo City. The study used a quantitative approach with a cross-sectional design. A sample of 75 respondents was drawn using accidental sampling. The research instruments consisted of questionnaires and BMI measurements, with data analysis using the Chi-Square test. The results showed a significant relationship between BMI (p = 0.001) and a history of disease (p = 0.004) and the menstrual cycle, and no significant relationship between stress levels and the menstrual cycle (p = 0.599). It was concluded that BMI and a history of disease were related to menstrual cycle regularity, while stress was not related to the menstrual cycle. This study is expected to serve as a reference for adolescent reproductive health education and interventions.

This study examines the physical fitness of rural and urban students in the Bardiya district. A sedentary lifestyle has frequently been prompted by automation and technological progress, leading to hypokinetic disorders that impact global health. Physical fitness is characterized by an individual's capacity to do daily tasks effectively and efficiently; it involves various health-related components, including cardiovascular endurance, muscular strength, flexibility, and body composition. The present study employed a quantitative descriptive research method, assessing 80 secondary school boys with the AAHPER (American Association for Health, Physical and Recreation) Youth Fitness Test Battery, comprising 40 rural and 40 urban participants. Statistical analysis (T-test) revealed that rural pupils excel greatly in several physical fitness assessments, including pull-ups, knee bent sit-ups, standing broad jump, and endurance, due to their superior muscular and cardiovascular development. No notable changes were detected in the 50-yard dash between the two groups. The findings further substantiate the necessity of enhancing physical activity among urban populations to bridge the fitness gap and advocate for more participation in sports and exercise inside schools, particularly to alleviate the adverse effects of sedentary lives among urban adolescents.

Introduction: Pelvic Floor Dysfunctions (PFD) have been strongly associated with vaginal birth and can significantly affect women’s quality of life. This study aimed to determine the prevalence of PFDs during postpartum period and its impact on women’s daily activities. Methods: A hospital based retrospective cross sectional study was conducted among 747 primiparous women at 9-12 months postpartum, who had delivered term live baby from July to September 2021. The different components of PFD were evaluated using a Nepali translated version of PFDI-20 and the impact on sexual function by BFLUTS questionnaire. The primary outcome was women’s self-reported occurrence of urinary, prolapse, defecatory and sexual problems. The impact on women’s daily activities was secondary outcomes. Data were analyzed by Spearman’s Rho correlation coefficient. Results: The prevalence of PFD was 25.97%. The self-reported rates of urinary, Colorectal, pelvic prolapse related and sexual problems were 138 (18.5%), 57 (7.6%), 89 (11.9%) and 53 (7.1%) respectively. No significant association was found between mode of delivery and any PFD symptoms. The duration of second stage of labour was not significantly associated with the urinary symptoms (= -0.051) but showed a statistically significant negative association with colorectal ((= -0.124) and prolapse symptoms ( = -0.164) , at p&lt;0.01 with a weak level of association. Conclusions: Pelvic floor dysfunctions are a common occurrence in the postpartum period and negatively affect women’s daily functioning. Conditions such as stress urinary incontinence, perineal pain, constipation, and dyspareunia are highly prevalent among postpartum women and have a significant negative impact on their daily activities and psychological well-being.

<title>Abstract</title> <bold>Introduction:</bold> Antibiotic resistance poses a global threat. Antibiotics are administered to 80-90% of terminally ill patients but evidence of their effectiveness in improving survival or symptom relief at the end of life (EOL) is scarce. <bold>Aim:</bold> To determine the proportion of deceased patients that continue antibiotic treatment after documented EOL discussion and the decision to prioritise symptom relief over active treatment. Secondarily compare the groups with and without antibiotics after EOL discussion in terms of differences in demographics, type of infection, mean survival time after EOL discussion and if fluid therapy followed the same trend as antibiotic use. <bold>Method:</bold> This was a retrospective cohort study including 100 patients aged 18 years or older who died with continued or discontinued antibiotics after EOL discussion, at Blekinge Hospital from January 2022 to February 2024. Patients were excluded if they received curative intended treatment until death, did not receive antibiotics during hospitalisation, or the antibiotic treatment was ended before EOL discussion. Medical record data were compared, using chi-2- , Fisher’s exact- and t-tests, between patients who continued antibiotics or not after EOL discussion, in terms of demographics, focus of infection and survival time after EOL discussion. Ethical approval was granted by the Swedish Ethical Review Authority on 2023-12-14 (Dnr: 2023-07647-01). <bold>Results:</bold> A total 36% (36/100) patients continued antibiotic treatment after EOL discussion. The most prescribed antibiotics were piperacillin-tazobactam (37%) and cefotaxime (32%) and the most common site of infection was pneumonia (45%). There was no statistical significance in survival time after EOL discussion between patients with antibiotics after EOL discussion or not (mean 2.7 days (range 0-11); IQR 1-3 vs 1.9 days (range 0-10); IQR 0.75-3; 95% CI 0.46-1.05; p=0.082). Patients who continued antibiotics were also significantly more likely to continue with intravenous fluids (11/36 (31%) vs 3/64 (5%); between-group difference of 26%; 95% CI 0.10-0.42; p=0.001). <bold>Conclusion:</bold> After EOL discussion more than one-third of inpatients continued antibiotics despite a shift to symptom relief, reflecting ongoing challenges in antimicrobial stewardship in palliative care.

Introducción: La logística juega un papel crucial en la preservación de la calidad y el rendimiento de los materiales para su aplicación en la industria cementera. En el sector constructivo, el tamaño de las partículas cementantes y otras características físicas, puede dificultar la logística asociada a su gestión, especialmente para el manejo de nuevos cementantes de tamaño nanométrico. Objetivo: Dada esta necesidad, este artículo tiene como objetivo abordar aspectos asociados al manejo responsable de nanopartículas cementantes, su transporte y almacenamiento. Materiales y métodos: Para ello, se investigaron aspectos claves relacionados con los riesgos de los silicatos cálcicos, los vehículos con características adecuadas para preservar las propiedades del producto y los diseños de centros de distribución para el flujo de los materiales. Resultados: A partir de esto, se establece la relevancia de la protección respiratoria como elementos de protección personal fundamentales para el manejo de nanopartículas cementantes, así como el uso de vehículos tipo silo cuyas características facilitan el cargue y descargue de materiales que requieren condiciones de humedad especiales. Conclusiones: Con esto, se desarrolló una guía logística para su transporte y almacenamiento, concluyendo que las buenas prácticas logísticas contribuyen a reducir costos, mejorando la eficiencia en la cadena de suministro.

High-risk human papillomaviruses (HPVs) are the primary etiological agents of cervical cancer, accounting for more than 300,000 deaths annually worldwide. Current prophylactic vaccines based on recombinant L1 major capsid virus-like particles (VLPs) have demonstrated strong efficacy but are restricted to a limited spectrum of HPV types. To address this limitation, the present study evaluated a recombinant L1L2 chimeric protein derived from HPV type 52 as a potential candidate for a broad-spectrum vaccine. The chimeric protein was expressed in Escherichia coli strain BL21 (DE3) and purified for immunization studies. Female BALB/c mice (Mus musculus, n = 5 groups) were immunized, and immune responses were analyzed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and pseudovirion-based neutralization assays (PBNA). The recombinant L1L2 vaccine candidate induced detectable antibody responses against HPV antigens; however, neutralizing activity remained modest. Histopathological analysis of liver and kidney tissues showed no evidence of toxicity, supporting the safety profile of the candidate. In summary, these results suggest that the HPV type 52 L1L2 chimeric protein represents a promising platform for the development of cervical cancer vaccines, although further optimization is required to achieve robust cross-neutralizing efficacy.

Background: Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most prevalent non-cutaneous malignancy and the second-leading cause of cancer-relatedmortality among males. Cancer is just one of the several disorders that may be linked to variations in trace element concentrations.Objective: To evaluate serum arrestin β-2 as a prostate cancer tumor marker and its association with trace elements.Methods: This case- control study was carried out at the Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, University of Baghdad and at the Urology department, Ghazi Al-Hariri Hospital for Surgical Specialities during the period from March 2022 to May 2023. In this case-control study 120 males were enrolled: Sixty men with newly diagnosed primary prostate cancer (PCa) and 60 healthy men as controls. Blood samples were tested for arrestin β-2 levels using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and trace element levels, including Zinc, Copper, and Manganese, were measured using a flame atomic absorption spectrophotometer.Results: Arrestin β-2 levels differed significantly between the control group and PCa patients. The serum copper level was significantly higher in the cases than in the controls. Zinc and manganese levels were significantly higher in the controls compared to the patients.Conclusion: It can be concluded that high arrestin β-2 and Copper levels and low Zinc and Manganese levels may serve as potential biomarkers for patients with prostatic Adenocarcinoma.

Se aborda el desafío de la insuficiencia renal fulminante en adolescentes donde confluyen factores hematológicos complejos como la hemoglobinopatía C con β-talasemia, desencadenando hemólisis y daño tubular severo. Objetivo: El presente reporte tiene como propósito describir la cronología clínica, los hallazgos de laboratorio y la gestión terapéutica de un cuadro poco habitual: una hemoglobinopatía C/β-talasemia no reconocida, desencadenante de LRA fulminante en contexto de hipertensión severa y sospecha de MAT. Metodología: Este es un reporte de caso observacional elaborado bajo guías CARE, complementado con una revisión narrativa de literatura reciente sobre nefropatía por pigmentos y microangiopatía. Presentación del Caso: Un adolescente de 17 años consultó por edema y disnea, presentando hipertensión crítica (200/130 mmHg) y anuria. Los exámenes revelaron acidosis metabólica, creatinina de 31.2 mg/dL y anemia de 6.9 g/dL, sin trombocitopenia. Al descartarse hemólisis microangiopática por ausencia de esquistocitos, la electroforesis confirmó hemoglobinopatía C (35.3%) y β-talasemia (Hb A₂ 62.1%). Pese al soporte dialítico y ventilatorio, el paciente falleció por falla multiorgánica. Discusión: Se analiza la interacción patogénica letal entre la liberación masiva de hemo, estrés oxidativo y nefrotoxicidad pigmentaria, agravada por hipertensión maligna, un mecanismo que mimetiza cuadros microangiopáticos y dificulta el diagnóstico. Conclusión: El caso subraya la urgencia de investigar hemoglobinopatías estructurales ante falla renal aguda y anemia inexplicada en jóvenes. Se recomienda la electroforesis temprana en estos escenarios para evitar retrasos terapéuticos y fomentar la cooperación interdisciplinaria entre nefrología y hematología.

Objective: To measure the clinical efficacy of intrathecal Bupivacaine alone versus intrathecal Bupivacaine plus Dexmedetomidine on postoperative pain alleviation in terms of quality and duration in women undergoing C-section Study Design: Randomized controlled trial, (Iranian Clinical Trial Registry: 76165) Place and Duration of Study: Department of Anaesthesiology, PAF Hospital (Faisal), Karachi Pakistan from Sep, 2023 to Feb 2024. Methodology: After registration with trial registry (ICTR) and ethical approval, this randomized controlled trial was performed in Anaesthesia department of PAF Hospital (Faisal), Karachi. Intrathecal Dexmedetomidine was given as an adjuvant to Bupivacaine in 33 gravid ladies (Group A) after randomization. Group A and Group B patients were followed for 24 hours post-operatively to assess duration and quality of analgesia. Statistical significance was compared between both study Groups. Results: At twenty-four hours of time lapse, 2(6.1%) Group A patients had mild pain, 24(72.7%) had moderate pain and 7(21.2%) had severe pain compared to 7(21.2%) Group B patients who had moderate pain and 26(78.8%) had severe pain with p-value &lt;0.001. The frequency of rescue analgesia was three times in 1(3.0) Group A and 10(30.3) Group B patients. The mean dose of analgesic ketorolac used by Group A patients was 53.64±23.4 milligrams with median dose of 60mg (IQR 30-120) compared to 110.91±19.099 milligrams in Group B with median dose of 120.0mg (IQR 60.0-150.0). Conclusion: We concluded that intrathecal Dexmedetomidine provides better postoperative analgesia in terms of quality and duration when used as an adjuvant with local anesthetic Bupivacaine.

Toplumun kültür, norm ve ahlaki değerlerinin öğrenme süreci olarak ifade edilen sosyalleşmenin, bilgisayar ve internet teknolojisinin yaygınlaşmasıyla birlikte kayda değer düzeyde dijital görünüm kazanmaya başladığı gözlemlenmektedir. Böylelikle dijital medya platformlarının dijital yerli olarak kavramlaştırılan kuşağın toplumsal yaşama dair birincil bilgilenme kaynağı haline geldiği ve gündelik yaşam pratiklerinin önemli ölçüde dijitalleştiği izlenebilmektedir. Öz olarak dijital sosyalleşme olarak tanımlanan bu sürecin sosyolojik bakışla araştırılması sağlıklı dijital kültür ve dijital toplumsal yapı için önem arz etmektedir. Bu doğrultuda araştırmamız, dijital göçmen ve dijital yerlilerin dijital medya platformlarında ahlaki değerlere ilişkin tutum ve yönelimlerini incelemeyi hedeflemektedir. Bir başka deyişle bu araştırma dijital göçmenden dijital yerliye geçişte ahlaki değerlere bakışın farklılaşıp farklılaşmadığını merhamet, mahremiyet, hakkaniyet gibi ahlaki değerler bağlamında ortaya koymayı amaçlamaktadır. Nicel desende tasarlanan araştırma Bursa’da ikamet eden 18 yaş ve üstü 411 katılımcı ile yapılmıştır. Elde edilen bulgular, dijital ahlaki değerler açısından dijital yerliler ve dijital göçmenler arasında anlamlı bir farklılık olduğunu göstermektedir.

Dogs are among the world’s most cherished companion animals, reflecting their increasingly close relationship with humans. As pets become integral members of households, the demand for accurate and reliable veterinary diagnostic tools is growing, particularly to ensure optimal health and clinical care. This study aimed at establishing species-specific reference intervals for canine serum biochemical parameters using the Respons®920 (DiaSys) liquid biochemistry analyser, with applicability in routine clinical practice. Additionally, the influence of sex and age on these parameters was assessed. A total of 193 clinically healthy dogs were included. Reference intervals were established for commonly used serum biochemical parameters: total proteins (TP), albumin, alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), phosphorus, calcium, creatinine, urea, cholesterol, triglycerides, sodium, potassium, and chloride. Reference intervals were calculated using the Reference Value Advisor software, strictly following the American Society of Veterinary Clinical Pathology guidelines. Statistical analysis revealed significant sex-related differences for ALT, AST, and urea, with higher values observed in males. Age-related differences were also identified for ALP, phosphorus, and TP, particularly between younger and older age groups. Although these differences were not sufficient to justify separate reference interval partitioning, they should be considered by clinicians during interpretation. This study provides species- and instrument-specific reference intervals for canine serum biochemistry using the Respons®920 analyser, and contributes valuable data on the influence of sex and age on routine biochemical parameters in dogs.

Background: Thyroid cancer is the most common endocrine malignancy. Its rising incidence is primarily attributed to the increased use of computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) performed for unrelated medical conditions. In this study, we aimed to examine two key aspects: first, the incidence of thyroid cancer in Bahrain, and second, the demographics, modes of presentation, histological subtypes, and treatment modalities among affected patients.

Ahlak konusunda yapılan bu makale çalışmasının amacı, Celâleddin Devvânî’nin Ahlâk-ı Celâlî adlı ahlak kitabını özgünlük açısından incelemek ve değerlendirmektir. Bu eserin özgünlük durumunu araştırabilmek için dikkate alınması ve karşılaştırılması gereken en önemli eser, Devvânî’nin sistematik ve içerik bakımından esas aldığı Ahlâk-ı Nâsırî’dir. Devvânî, Nasîruddin Tûsî’nin bu eserine büyük ölçüde sadık kalmakla birlikte ahlak felsefesi açısından özgünlük değeri taşıyan birçok yeni unsur katmış, Ahlâk-ı Nâsırî’nin nefis teorisi, mutluluk ve içki içme adabı gibi bazı kısımlarını hiç almamış, bazı noktalarda da Tûsî’nin görüşlerini eleştirmiştir. Şehabeddin Sühreverdî gibi Ahlâk-ı Nâsırî’de görüşlerine hiç başvurulmayan filozoflara yer vermesi yanında, Gazzâlî gibi bir iki defa atıf yapılan bazı filozofların görüşlerine daha çok yer vermiştir. İbn Miskeveyh ve Tûsî’nin ahlak kitaplarında felsefi kaynaklar baskın iken Devvânî eserinde felsefi kaynaklara ilaveten dinî, edebî ve tasavvufi kaynakları da kullanmıştır. Eserin orijinal adı olan Levâmi’u’l-İşrâk fî Mekârimi’l-Ahlâk ve başlık adlandırmalarındaki lâmi, lem’a ve tenvir terimlerinden anlaşılacağı gibi Ahlâk-ı Celâlî işrakî bir üslup ve anlatıma sahiptir. Görüş ve örnek davranışlarına yer verilen mutasavvıflar filozof kategorisine dâhil edilmiştir. Adalet erdemine geniş yer vermesi yanında özgün açıklamalarda bulunmuş, bazı erdemleri örneklendirirken Abdülmelik Cüveynî ile Sultan Melikşah arasında geçen bir hadise anlatımında olduğu gibi geniş tarihî bilgiler nakletmiştir. Bu makale çalışmasında nitel araştırma yönteminin doküman analizi versiyonu kullanılarak ilgili görüş ve açıklamalar karşılaştırma, yorumlama ve değerlendirmeye tabi tutulmuştur.

Purpose: The acute care surgery (ACS) model establishes the capacity to immediately accommodate nontraumatic emergency surgery requiring urgent treatment while simultaneously elevating the existing trauma care system to the highest level. This study aims to evaluate the 4-year experience of operating after expanding the trauma surgery domain to ACS at this institution, which was designated as a lower-level trauma center by the local government in 2020.Methods: A retrospective study was conducted using clinical records for patients who underwent surgery in the Division of Trauma and Acute Care Surgery over a 54-month period, from March 2021 to August 2025.Results: Trauma volumes remained stable (10–20 cases semiannually) after ACS implementation, with surgical case numbers similar to those recorded before its introduction. Nontrauma volumes increased from 3 cases in March–August 2023 to 163 in March–August 2025.Conclusions: The transition from the trauma surgery model to the ACS model successfully increased the efficiency of trauma and emergency general surgery within the level II low-volume environment, accomplishing without reducing the existing trauma caseload. These findings support the adoption of ACS in similar emergency medical institutions and offer insights relevant for national policy development concerning emergency general surgery in Korea.

Researchers have recently begun to investigate microRNAs (miRNAs) as a potential new class of biomarkers. In this study, we examine whether miR-3652 may be regarded as a powerful biomarker for predicting the prognosis of breast cancer (BC). In this study, the expression level of miR-3652 was detected in 30 FFPE tissue pairs of tumoral samples and their adjacent non-tumoral tissues using qRT-PCR. The clinicopathological characteristics of patients relative to miR-3652 expression level, along with fold change analysis employing the 2-ΔΔCT method, were also investigated. All statistical analyses were conducted using GraphPad Prism version 8.4.3 (686). We found that the miR-3652 level in BC FFPE tissues is notably increased compared to matched non-cancerous specimens. Also, we analyzed the association between the expression level of miR-3652 and the clinicopathological parameters of BC patients. The overexpression of miR-3652 exhibited no significant association with age, tumor stage, ER status, PR status, TNM stage, or calcification. All HER2-negative status patients suggested a potential trend (P = 0.017), indicating that low miR-3652 expression was more common in HER2-negative status subjects. Moreover, the p-value, AUC, Std. Error, sensitivity, and specificity are (p &lt; 0.018, 0.6772, 0.06905, 0.53, and 0.80, respectively), which signifies a moderate capacity of the test to differentiate between patients with tumors and controls. The results of fold change analysis employing the 2-ΔΔCT method indicated a (6.89)-fold elevation in miR-3652 expression in tumors relative to controls. This suggests that miR-3652 may have an oncogenic role in carcinogenesis, potentially promoting BC development. In conclusion, our results demonstrated that elevated miR-3652 expression associates with the progression of BC, and this indicates that miR-3652 may possess an oncogenic function in tumorigenesis, possibly facilitating BC progression. Additional studies are required.

The article highlights the need for standardisation in reporting dose variations. It also provides researchers and clinicians with insight into current practices in the use of geometric indices and statistical methods for evaluating contouring variation.

Background and objectives Older adults’ physical and sensory function and self-perceived health state are associated with their daily health behavior, such as moderate-to-vigorous physical activity (MVPA), light physical activity (LPA), sedentary behavior (SEB), and sleep duration (SD), though most studies examine these independently, overlooking 24-hour interactions. This study aims to investigate the relationships between physical and sensory function (vision, hearing, activity limitations), self-perceived health and the pattern of 24-hour activity behaviors via compositional data analysis. Methods A secondary data analysis was conducted on data from the Survey of Health, Ageing and Retirement in Europe. Compositional data analysis was employed to account for the inherently interdependent nature of these behaviors. Linear regression models were implemented, designating activity behaviors as the dependent variable and sensory/physical function as the independent variable. Results The results indicated that vision and hearing showed weaker and nonsignificant associations with activity behaviors. Activity limitations significantly influence health behavior patterns, with no limitations associated with more time in MVPA and less time in SEB and SD. Self-perceived health is significantly positively associated with more MVPA, while inversely associated with SEB and SD. Conclusion This study revealed that older adults with limitations in their daily activities showed the most sedentary daily activity pattern. Future research should develop targeted interventions to improve activity behaviors in this population.

Introduction: Pressure sore are localized skin and soft tissue damage typically occurring over bony prominences due to impaired blood supply from sustained pressure. This study aims to review the clinical profile patients with pressure sore and the type of management of pressure sore in regional referral center of western Nepal. Methods: This retrospective, observational study was conducted at the Department of Burns, Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Charak Memorial Hospital, Pokhara, from January 2023 to December 2024. Ethical approval was obtained from National Health Research Council on 16 February 2025 (Reference no:1839). The study included all patients regardless of age and gender who were treated for pressure sores during the study period, with complete medical records. Patient demographics, sore characteristics, predisposing factors, and treatment modalities were analyzed. Results: There were 21 patients with 42 pressure sore wounds, included with mean age 45.14±25.54 years (range: 16-92 years). Of all patients 16 (79.19%) were male and 16 patients (76.19%) were patients from outside Pokhara Valley. Spinal cord injury was present in 12 (57.14%) patients. The sacral and trochanteric regions were affected with 14 (33.33%) wounds each. There were 26 (61.90%) wounds classified as National Pressure Ulcer Advisory Panel Stage IV. Surgical management was performed in 14 (66.67%) patients with Local flap was used to reconstruct 12 (50%) of the wounds. Conclusions: Pressure sore in this population predominantly affected middle aged males with spinal cord injuries, presenting with advanced-stage wounds. Local pattern flap was the most common method of soft tissue coverage.

In the original publication [...]

ABSTRACT Introduction Non‐specific abdominal pain is a common and diagnostically challenging presentation in acute care, yet little is known about patient experiences within this setting. This study explores the experiences of patients attending a surgical same‐day emergency care (SDEC) unit with non‐specific abdominal pain. Design Qualitative descriptive study using inductive thematic analysis. Methods 23 adults (aged ≥ 18 years) presenting with acute non‐specific abdominal pain to a surgical SDEC in England were purposively sampled. Semi‐structured interviews were conducted at least 2 weeks after discharge and thematically analysed inductively, iteratively and collaboratively by a team of psychiatrists, surgeons and a lived experience co‐researcher. Results Three themes were identified: (1) The journey to the SDEC —participants described uncertainty and fear about potential diagnoses and varied thresholds for help‐seeking, (2) The consultation —while many appreciated rapid access to care, experiences of communication and explanation were mixed, with some feeling dismissed or confused by the absence of a clear diagnosis, and (3) Post‐consultation reflections —some felt reassured by normal test results, while others struggled with persistent symptoms, a lack of follow‐up, and ongoing uncertainty. Discussions around psychosocial factors were rare. Conclusions Acute non‐specific abdominal pain can be distressing for patients, even after attending acute surgical services, particularly when communication is perceived to be unclear and follow‐up is inconsistent. A more structured, patient‐centred approach, including standardised follow‐up, clear explanations and sensitivity to psychosocial factors, could improve experiences and possibly outcomes for this group. Patient and Public Contribution A patient and public involvement and engagement (PPIE) group, comprising individuals with lived and living experience of persistent physical symptoms, shaped the scope and design of the research and co‐produced the interview topic guide. A lived experience representative was actively involved in data analysis, interpretation and manuscript preparation.

Objective The present study examined links among physician implicit bias and physician word use and patient satisfaction during outpatient medical visits. Method To test these relationships, we measured implicit anti-Hispanic bias of 53 internal and family medicine residents and audio recorded outpatient visits between these residents and 291 of their Hispanic-identifying patients between 2015 and 2017. After each visit, both patients and resident physicians completed surveys measuring their perceptions of the interactions (residents) or their satisfaction with their care (patients). Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count was used to quantify resident word use from each audio recording. Results A quadratic relationship between physician implicit bias and patient satisfaction suggested that increased levels of implicit anti-Hispanic bias were related to lower levels of patient satisfaction, but only at high levels of physician bias. Exploratory analyses revealed that several language variables interacted with physician implicit bias to predict patient satisfaction suggesting that implicit bias may also be communicated by more moderately biased physicians in some contexts. Conclusions These results add to a growing literature establishing links between physician implicit bias and patient care and suggest that future work should explore how context impacts the communication of physician bias to patients.

Purpose: To evaluate the choroidal thickness in healthcare professionals using a surgical face mask. Study Design: Cross sectional study. Place and Duration of Study: Ittefaq Hospital, Lahore, and Sohail’s Oculab from June 2023 to July 2024. Method: Sixty healthcare professionals aged 25–45 years with best corrected visual acuity of 6/6 or 6/9 and normal intraocular pressure (12–21 mmHg) were included. Participants with any systemic or ocular pathology were excluded. The instruments used in this study included a distance Snellen chart, an air-puff tonometer (Topcon), and a swept-source OCT device (Topcon DRI OCT Triton 3D). A self-structured proforma was used for data collection. Choroidal thickness was measured after wearing a surgical face mask for at least 4 hours and again 30 minutes after mask removal using swept-source OCT. Results: The study included the right eyes of 60 participants in which there were 34 males (58.3%) and 26 females (41.7%). The mean age was 30.35 ± 4.90 years. A paired-sample t-test showed a statistically significant change in choroidal thickness between 4 hours of mask wearing and 30 minutes after mask removal (p &lt; 0.001). Conclusion: The findings showed a significant difference in choroidal thickness when wearing a surgical face mask compared with not wearing one. Prolonged mask use may cause hypercapnia, which can increase retinal vessel diameter and blood flow, leading to increased choroidal thickness.

Objective: This study aimed to examine the relationship between physical activity and pain levels in older adults and to evaluate the impact of sociodemographic characteristics and physical activity on geriatric pain. Materials and Methods: This descriptive and cross-sectional study was conducted using the Demographic Information Form, Standardized Mini-Mental Test (SMMT), Physical Activity Scale for the Elderly (PASE), Numeric Pain Rating Scale (NPRS), and the Geriatric Pain Measure (GPM). The study was carried out between May and June 2025 with individuals aged 65 and over (n=495) living in a western province of Turkey. The STROBE checklist was used for reporting. Results: The mean score on the PASE was found to be low (104.48±67.84). It was determined that 65.1% of participants did not engage in regular physical exercise. The mean score on the GPM was 47.66±12.44, indicating a moderate level of pain. Of the participants, 36% reported experiencing pain for the past 1-6 months, while 33.3% stated that the pain had lasted less than one month. The average pain intensity was also moderate (3.92±1.96). No significant correlation was found between the GPM and the PASE (r=0.035). Conclusion: The results revealed that older adults had low levels of physical activity and the majority did not engage in regular exercise. No significant relationship was found between experienced pain and physical activity levels. To ensure effective pain management and promote an active lifestyle among older adults, it is essential to address the individual and environmental factors contributing to physical inactivity.

In 2021, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved Loreev XR ® , a long-acting formulation of lorazepam, raising important clinical considerations for nurse practitioners (NPs) who routinely manage anxiety, insomnia, and stress-related conditions. Despite well-established risks, including dependence, withdrawal, cognitive impairment, and heightened danger when combined with central nervous system depressants, benzodiazepines (BZDs) remain widely prescribed in the United States. The current article examines the rationale for introducing a new extended-release BZD, the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties distinguishing it from immediate-release formulations, and implications for safe prescribing. The critical roles of primary care NPs and psychiatric–mental health NPs in patient assessment, risk evaluation, systems-based safety, transitions of care, and evidence-based tapering will be emphasized.

La exposición prolongada a posturas inadecuadas y a mobiliario no ergonómico en oficinas de investigación incrementa el riesgo de trastornos musculoesqueléticos y reduce la satisfacción laboral. Este estudio evaluó la efectividad de intervenciones posturales y herramientas ergonómicas en la reducción de estos riesgos. Se realizó un estudio cuasiexperimental con pretest y postest en 34 trabajadores de oficinas y laboratorios, implementando capacitaciones en posturas ergonómicas y la introducción de teclados y mouses ergonómicos. La evaluación se llevó a cabo mediante el método Rapid Office Strain Assessment (ROSA) y encuestas de satisfacción laboral. Los resultados mostraron que la puntuación ROSA promedio se redujo de 11,5 a 9,1, indicando una disminución significativa del riesgo ergonómico. Además, se evidenció una mejora en la percepción del confort laboral y una reducción en la frecuencia de molestias musculoesqueléticas. Las intervenciones implementadas mejoraron las condiciones laborales sin requerir grandes inversiones, resaltando la importancia de estrategias accesibles para la prevención de trastornos musculoesqueléticos.

Background: The coexistence of multiple immune-mediated inflammatory diseases (IMIDs) in a single patient represents a growing clinical challenge, yet comprehensive data on patients with more than two IMIDs remain limited. Objective: To characterize the clinical profiles, therapeutic responses, and quality of life outcomes in patients presenting with complex IMID associations involving cutaneous manifestations. Methods: We established the CIMID-Skin registry, a prospective observational study enrolling adult patients with multiple IMIDs including at least one dermatological condition. Patients were stratified into control (2 IMIDs) and complex (≥3 IMIDs) groups. Clinical data validated severity scores, and patient-reported outcomes were systematically collected. Results: The cohort (n=54) was predominantly female (77.8%), with a mean age of 45.4 years and overweight range BMI (27.4 kg/m²). Patients frequently presented with multiple IMIDs, with 59.3% having ≥3 conditions. The most common diseases were psoriasis and hidradenitis suppurativa (42.6% each) and psoriatic arthritis (40.7%). Paradoxical reactions were observed in a significant proportion of patients, with paradoxical psoriasis reported in 24.1% of the cohort. Quality of life was markedly impaired, with 65.2% showing moderate-to-extreme DLQI impact, and 24.1% reaching the WHO-5 depression threshold. Conclusions: Patients with complex IMID associations demonstrate distinct clinical patterns and therapeutic challenges. The high prevalence of paradoxical reactions and the specific clustering of certain IMIDs suggest shared pathophysiological mechanisms that warrant further investigation.

Abstract Purpose Pterygoid implants are a viable alternative to sinus-lifting procedures; however, their placement may risk damaging adjacent soft tissues. This study aimed to clarify the morphology of the buccinator muscle (Bu), particularly its attachment to the pterygoid hamulus, and to assess the risk of injury during implant surgery. Methods Cadaveric dissection, histological analysis, and micro-computed tomography were performed. Bone morphometry was used to evaluate the maxillary tuberosity. Histological sections were analyzed to measure the distance between the Bu and the maxillary tuberosity, as well as to examine its attachment to the pterygoid hamulus. Results Substantial individual variation was observed in the shape and bone density of the maxillary tuberosity, with some specimens exhibiting low bone volume fraction (BV/TV). The Bu was located immediately posterior to the tuberosity at the root of the pterygoid hamulus (mean: 0.61 mm), but more distant at the tip (mean: 2.37 mm). The muscle exhibited a dual mode of attachment: tendinous at the root and periosteal at the tip. Implant perforation near the root may therefore pose a higher risk of muscle injury. Conclusions This study revealed a dual attachment of the buccinator muscle to the pterygoid hamulus and emphasized its close proximity to the maxillary tuberosity. Additionally, low BV/TV values in some specimens highlight the anatomical variability of this region. Understanding individual differences in bone structure and the precise location of soft tissue attachments is essential for safer and more predictable pterygoid implant placement.

A LASSO-selected, internally validated nomogram enables early risk stratification and decision support for MBE after reperfusion in AIS. Prospective external validation in independent cohorts is required before clinical adoption to confirm reliability and generalizability.

Background Clostridioides difficile infection (CDI) remains a major healthcare-associated infection with limited contemporary data from Saudi Arabia. This study evaluated CDI prevalence, risk factors, recurrence predictors, and treatment patterns in hospitalized patients at a tertiary teaching hospital. Methods Retrospective analysis of 1,054 hospitalized patients screened between March 2023 and February 2024. CDI was confirmed by positive toxin assay and/or nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT). Demographic, clinical, antibiotic, acid-suppressant, and treatment data were collected. Bivariate associations and multivariable logistic regression were used to identify predictors of recurrence. Results CDI prevalence was 10.8% (114/1,054). Median age was 37 years (IQR 51.25); 32.5% had malignancy. Antibiotic exposure preceded CDI in 59.6% (meropenem 24.7%, ceftriaxone 16.5% of courses), and acid suppressants were used in 57.0% (omeprazole 92.3%). Recurrence occurred in 11.4% (13/114). On bivariate analysis, acid-suppressant use was significantly associated with recurrence ( p = 0.041). In multivariable logistic regression, only metronidazole plus vancomycin combination therapy independently predicted recurrence (OR 11.29, 95% CI 1.13–112.42, p = 0.039). Trends were observed for malignancy (OR 2.94, p = 0.112) and acid-suppressant use (OR 1.85, p = 0.440), limited by the small number of recurrent events. Metronidazole monotherapy dominated treatment (64.8%). Conclusion CDI prevalence reached 10.8% with an 11.4% recurrence rate. Acid-suppressant exposure and combination therapy were key recurrence signals, while metronidazole remains overused despite international guideline shifts. Enhanced antibiotic and acid-suppressant stewardship, alongside improved access to guideline-recommended therapies, are critical to reducing CDI burden in Saudi tertiary hospitals.

Background: Barbed suture allows for a knotless tenorrhaphy, which could provide an expedient method of flexor tendon repair while limiting cross-sectional area (CSA) following repair. Methods: Fifty-one cadaveric flexor digitorum profundus tendons were procured based on an a priori sample size estimate. Specimens were randomized to either one of three 6-strand repair techniques (3-0 braided polyester Savage repair, 2-0 strength polypropylene barbed suture repair, and 4-0 looped nylon M-Tang repair). Length of time to complete each repair and cost of material was recorded. The long and short axes of the repair site were measured to calculate the CSA. An Instron loaded the constructs to 2-mm gapping and load to failure. Differences between long and short axes and CSA prior to tenotomy and post-tenorrhaphy were measured and compared for change. Results: Repair time for the Savage technique was significantly longer and provided significantly greater loads to 2-mm gapping and failure. Material cost with the Savage repair was significantly less than repairs with the other materials, whereas material cost with the barbed suture was significantly less than the material cost of the M-Tang repair. There were no significant differences between the 3 groups regarding change in long axis, short axis, or CSA measurements after repair. Conclusions: The Savage repair provided the greatest strength, with a lower suture cost, but a greater repair time. Barbed suture repair performed similar to the M-Tang repair at a lower material cost.

El envejecimiento cutáneo es un proceso fisiológico que conlleva múltiples alteraciones visibles en la piel, como la pérdida de elasticidad, la aparición de arrugas y la disminución de la luminosidad, especialmente en mujeres entre los 50 y 60 años. Ante la creciente demanda de alternativas estéticas seguras y eficaces, este estudio se propuso evaluar la eficacia de la combinación de la técnica de micropunción (microneedling) con la aplicación de péptidos cosméticos, específicamente Argireline, reconocido por su capacidad para simular el efecto de la toxina botulínica sin sus efectos adversos. Se aplicó una metodología de enfoque cuantitativo, con diseño cuasi-experimental, en una muestra de 25 mujeres con signos visibles de envejecimiento facial. A través de escalas clínicas y encuestas estructuradas, se midieron parámetros como hidratación, textura, elasticidad, luminosidad y profundidad de arrugas, antes y después del tratamiento. Los resultados mostraron mejoras significativas en todos los indicadores analizados en el grupo que recibió el tratamiento combinado, destacando una alta percepción de efectividad (88 %) y satisfacción general (84 %) entre las participantes. Además, se evidenció que la micropunción favorece la penetración transdérmica del Argireline, potenciando su acción rejuvenecedora. La ausencia de efectos adversos relevantes y la buena tolerancia del tratamiento respaldan su seguridad. En conclusión, la combinación de micropunción con Argireline se consolida como una opción estética innovadora, mínimamente invasiva y científicamente respaldada para la prevención y tratamiento del envejecimiento cutáneo, con implicaciones positivas tanto en la apariencia física como en el bienestar emocional de las pacientes.

Postoperative opioid consumption was not significantly different between preemptive and preventive administration of acetaminophen/ibuprofen in patients undergoing RALP.

ABSTRACT The objective of this study is to establish a droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) method for the detection of human parvovirus B19 (B19V) and provide accurate and reliable technical support for molecular biological diagnosis and epidemiological investigation of the virus. Specific primers and a TaqMan probe targeting the NS1 region of the B19V genome were designed, and a reaction system based on ddPCR was constructed and optimized. The methodology was validated through sensitivity, specificity, and repeatability tests. Subsequently, the method was applied to eight B19V-positive samples to evaluate its practical applicability. Methodological validation experiments demonstrated excellent sensitivity with a good linear relationship ( R ² = 0.9974) and a minimum detection limit of 1.013 × 10⁻¹ copies/μL. No cross-reactivity was observed with 11 respiratory pathogens, 5 pathogens presenting similar clinical manifestations, and 4 blood-borne pathogens. The inter- and intra-assay coefficients of variation for high-, medium-, and low-concentration samples were all ≤10%. Furthermore, this method was successfully applied to clinical samples, with stable detection of B19V in five high-concentration throat swab samples and three low-concentration blood samples. The ddPCR method established in this study exhibits high sensitivity, specificity, and repeatability, offering a robust tool for molecular diagnosis and epidemiological monitoring of B19V infection. IMPORTANCE Early human parvovirus B19 (B19V) infections were sporadic or occurred in small clusters, attracting little attention. Since late 2023, nine European Union/European Economic Area (EU/EEA) countries have reported a significant increase in B19 infections. Moreover, the virus has robust physicochemical tolerance and the potential to resist pathogen removal processes such as filtration, inactivation, and pasteurization, which have raised the close attention and vigilance of international organizations, governments, and the public. Despite existing qPCR and antigen/antibody tests, the growing number of infections in multiple countries highlights the need for a more accurate and efficient detection system. Based on this, our team carried out related research and built a system configuration based on the third-generation droplet digital polymerase chain reaction platform, with a view to updating the B19V detection method.

Study Design: Retrospective case-control study. Objective: To evaluate whether patients from highly deprived neighborhoods, as defined by the Area Deprivation Index (ADI), undergoing one-level cervical disc arthroplasty (CDA) experience differences in (1) postoperative medical complications, (2) lengths of stay (LOS), emergency department (ED) visits, and readmissions compared with less disadvantaged patients. Summary of Background Data: The ADI measures neighborhood-level deprivation at the national level. Little is known about the role of neighborhood deprivation on outcomes after CDA. Methods: A national insurance claims database was used to identify patients who underwent single-level CDA between 2010 and 2022. Patients from less disadvantaged neighborhoods (ADI &lt;90th percentile) were matched in a 1:5 ratio with patients from more deprived areas (ADI &gt;90th percentile) using propensity score matching on age, sex, and Elixhauser Comorbidity Index (ECI), yielding a final cohort of 25,975 patients: 4331 in the low ADI group and 21,644 in the high ADI group. Multivariable logistic regression models were used to assess odds of 90-day complications, readmissions, and ED visits. t tests compared LOS. P -values&lt;0.05 were significant. Results: High ADI patients experienced significantly higher odds of total 90-day medical complications compared with less disadvantaged patients (3.54% vs. 2.67%; OR: 1.37; 95% CI: 1.12–1.70; P =0.003). High ADI patients had longer mean hospital stays (1.75 vs. 1.66 d; P &lt;0.01). Ninety-day readmission (1.54% vs. 1.36%; OR: 1.13; P =0.379) and ED visits (1.64% vs. 1.43%; OR: 1.14; P =0.330) were similar between groups. Conclusions: Neighborhood deprivation is associated with increased lengths of stay and a higher overall rate of medical complications after CDA, despite similar readmission and ED visit rates. These findings emphasize the importance of incorporating socioeconomic context into perioperative care and resource planning. Level of Evidence: Level III.

Background: Psychosocial stigma represents a significant burden in persons with lung cancer—particularly among those undergoing chemotherapy—yet the heterogeneity of stigma experiences remains understudied. While prior research has explored stigma in cancer populations, factors such as psychological resilience, social support, and clinical characteristics (e.g., smoking history, comorbidities) in shaping distinct stigma profiles have not been comprehensively examined. Latent profile analysis—a statistical method to identify unobserved subgroups—offers a novel approach to understanding stigma variability and its predictors in this population. Objectives: This study aimed to (a) characterize sociodemographic and clinical profiles of persons with lung cancer receiving chemotherapy, (b) identify latent stigma subgroups based on psychosocial burden, and (c) examine factors associated with subgroup membership, including psychological resilience, social support, and health-related covariates. Methods: A cross-sectional analysis of 273 persons with lung cancer was conducted using validated instruments (Chinese Lung Cancer Stigma Scale, Connor-Davidson Resilience Scale, Multidimensional Scale of Perceived Social Support). Latent profile analysis and multivariate logistic regression were employed to classify stigma subgroups and determine predictors. Results: Three latent subgroups emerged: low stigma-positive coping, moderate stigma, and high stigma-excessive anxiety. Lower psychological resilience and social support significantly predicted membership in moderate and high stigma subgroups. Smoking history and chronic comorbidities uniquely distinguished the high stigma subgroup. Higher education and stronger social support were protective against severe stigma. Discussion: Stigma heterogeneity in persons with lung cancer underscores the need for tailored psychosocial interventions. Enhancing psychological resilience and social support may mitigate stigma burden—particularly in high-risk subgroups. Clinical strategies for persons receiving chemotherapy should integrate stigma assessment and target modifiable predictors to improve mental health outcomes. This study highlights the clinical complexity of stigma management in oncology palliative care.

Geçiş dönemlerinden biri olan doğumun sadece fizyolojik değil sosyo-kültürel yönleri de bulunmaktadır. Bebeğin yaşama başlangıcını, kadının ise yeni bir toplumsal statüye, anneliğe, geçişini ifade eden bu geçiş dönemi için her toplum kendine özgü ritüeller geliştirmiştir. Türk folklorunda bu ritüeller, bebeğin ve annenin doğum sonu dönemi (lohusalık) sağlıklı bir şekilde atlatmaları için oluşturulmuştur. Geçmiş yıllarda anne ve bebek sağlığıyla ilgili geleneksel bakış açısı ve uygulamaların yaygınlığı, tıbbi ve teknolojik imkanların yetersizliği ve demonik varlıklardan duyulan korku gibi sebepler lohusalık ritüellerinin şekillenmesinde etkili olmuştur. Bu çalışma, uzun bir tarihsel geçmişe sahip olan Türk lohusalık ritüellerinin günümüzde ne ölçüde yaşatıldığı sorusundan hareketle ortaya çıkmıştır. Nitel araştırma yöntemiyle tasarlanan ve veri toplama tekniği olarak derinlemesine görüşmeden (mülakat) yararlanılarak Gaziantep kent merkezinde gerçekleştirilen alan araştırmasında, lohusalık dönemini henüz atlatmış kadınların lohusalık ritüellerinden hangilerini, kimlerle, ne şekilde, neden gerçekleştirdiğine ve sağlık hizmetlerine yönelme davranışlarına odaklanarak söz konusu ritüellere yönelik bakış açıları ve tutumları tespit edilmiştir. Böylelikle günümüzde varlığı devam ettiren ve değişime uğrayan lohusalık ritüellerinin yanı sıra kaybolmaya yüz tutmuş olanlar da ortaya çıkarılmıştır. Bu durumun nedenleri arasında tıbbi imkânlardaki artış, sağlık hizmetlerine erişimin artışı, lohusaya ve bebeğe yönelik bakış açısının değişimi ve kadınların eğitim düzeylerindeki yükseliş gibi faktörler sıralanabilmektedir.

Norovirus is the leading cause of acute gastroenteritis worldwide, responsible for up to 90% of viral gastroenteritis outbreaks and an estimated 10.6 billion USD in annual economic losses in the U.S. Despite its well-documented seasonality, wastewater surveillance in the Eastern Upper Peninsula of Michigan reveals persistent GI norovirus detection year-round, diverging from national clinical trends that consistently show far greater GII prevalence. To characterize norovirus dynamics in this region, 250 mL wastewater influent grab samples were collected once per week across 14 sites, concentrated using a PEG-based method, and analyzed via digital droplet PCR (ddPCR) for GI and GII concentrations. Across the study period, the rate of positive sites per month ranged from 57 to 100% for GI and 74 to 97% for GII, with mean positivity rates of 85.4% (GI) and 88.7% (GII), indicating that both genogroups were detected frequently at comparable levels. GI was more prevalent in winter and spring (December–May), whereas GII was more prevalent during spring and summer (March–August). Mean GI gene copies per 100 mL ranged from 12,898 (October) to 532,792 (February), while mean GII concentrations ranged from 29,806 (December) to 1,100,215 (May). These patterns contrast with national clinical data, where GI contributes to a small minority of reported norovirus cases. This study explores potential environmental and behavioral factors contributing to this regional pattern. GI norovirus demonstrates greater resistance to wastewater treatment and environmental stability, which may facilitate its persistence in the region. Additionally, congregate living settings, such as college campuses and correctional facilities, may contribute to sustained GI prevalence through foodborne transmission and asymptomatic viral shedding. Overall, these findings suggest that environmental and social factors influence norovirus seasonality and genogroup distribution in this region, underscoring the need for improved monitoring and expanded multi-site wastewater and epidemiological research to better understand norovirus persistence in similar communities.

A disparity was observed between clinical and electroencephalographic (EEG) classifications, particularly among children with epilepsy and cerebral palsy. EEG evaluation is therefore recommended as an essential component of epilepsy management in this population.

Background/Objectives: Viral hepatitis remains a significant global cause of chronic liver disease, highlighting the importance of effective vaccination strategies. This review assesses recent evidence on vaccine safety and effectiveness. Methods: A comprehensive search of PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, and Scopus identified English-language studies published from January 2000 to September 2025. Eligible studies evaluated vaccination for hepatitis A, B, C, or E, as well as vaccine responses in individuals with chronic liver disease or HIV infection. Of 5254 records screened, 166 studies met the inclusion criteria. Results: Hepatitis A vaccines demonstrated excellent safety, 95–100% short-term seroprotection, and durable immunity for both inactivated and live-attenuated formulations, with population-level reductions in disease incidence. Hepatitis B vaccines showed consistently strong immunogenicity across age groups, with over 90% seroprotection from recombinant and CpG-adjuvanted formulations. Effective prevention of mother-to-child transmission required maternal antiviral therapy, timely birth-dose vaccination, hepatitis B immunoglobulin (HBIG) administration, and post-vaccination serologic testing. Long-term data demonstrated immune persistence for up to 35 years and significant reductions in liver cancer following neonatal HBV vaccination. Limited studies in hepatitis C populations showed impaired responses, partially improved with higher or booster doses. Hepatitis E vaccines showed excellent safety and over 99% seroconversion. In non-viral liver disease and post-transplant populations, vaccine responses were reduced but remained clinically meaningful, especially with adjuvanted or higher-dose HBV vaccines. Among HIV-infected individuals, HAV vaccination was generally effective, while enhanced HBV regimens markedly improved seroprotection. Conclusions: Hepatitis A, B, and E vaccines are safe, immunogenic, and effective, with neonatal hepatitis B vaccination critical for preventing maternal transmission. No licensed HCV vaccine exists, and therapeutic HCV vaccines show limited efficacy. Optimized and targeted vaccination strategies are needed for individuals with chronic liver disease, HIV infection, HCV infection, transplant recipients, and other immunocompromised populations to maximize public health impact.

Mục tiêu: Mô tả đặc điểm lâm sàng, cận lâm sàng bệnh nhân UTV giai đoạn I-II và đánh giá kết quả điều trị UTV ở nhóm bệnh nhân trên. Đối tượng và phương pháp nghiên cứu: Thiết kế mô tả hồi cứu trên 126 bệnh nhân UTV giai đoạn I-II được điều trị phẫu thuật và theo dõi tại Bệnh viện Đa khoa tỉnh Thái Bình giai đoạn 2019 – 2023. Kết quả: Nghiên cứu cho thấy bệnh nhân ung thư vú có tuổi trung bình 59,3 tuổi, đa số sau mãn kinh (75,4%). Triệu chứng thường gặp nhất là tự sờ thấy khối u (73,8%), chủ yếu ở ¼ trên ngoài, kích thước 2–5 cm; khoảng 30,2% có di căn hạch N1. Về mô bệnh học, ung thư biểu mô ống xâm nhập chiếm ưu thế (91,3%), đa phần độ II. Tất cả bệnh nhân được phẫu thuật cắt tuyến vú triệt căn biến đổi kết hợp điều trị bổ trợ đa mô thức, trong đó hóa trị 94,4%, xạ trị 42,9% và nội tiết 61,1%. Biến chứng sau mổ chủ yếu là rối loạn tâm lý, tổn thương thần kinh nách và đau vết mổ; biến chứng nặng ít gặp. Sau theo dõi, 96,8% còn sống, tỷ lệ tử vong 3,2% và tái phát/di căn 9,5%, chủ yếu là di căn xa. Tỷ lệ sống thêm toàn bộ sau 5 năm đạt 96,3% và sống thêm không bệnh 89,5%. Phân tích đa biến không ghi nhận khác biệt có ý nghĩa về OS và DFS theo tình trạng hạch, kích thước, thể và độ mô bệnh học, dù nhóm không di căn hạch và độ mô học thấp có tiên lượng tốt hơn (p &gt; 0,05). Kết luận: Điều trị đa mô thức trong ung thư vú giai đoạn I-II tại bệnh viện đa khoa tuyến tỉnh cho thấy hiệu quả điều trị khả quan, với kết quả không thua kém so với các cơ sở điều trị chuyên sâu tuyến trung ương.

Dyslipidaemia is a harbinger cardiovascular disease (CVD) and with the rising prevalence especially in the developing world, where 80% are said to be at risk for dyslipidaemia is alarming. Major factor implicated included adoption of unhealthy lifestyle, consumption of junk food and refined products leading to obesity, and related factor. However pathological factors from diseases such as nephrotic syndromes and familial cases also are implicative. Dyslipidaemia in adult can be traced to childhood and this attract early intervention before complications set in. lipid test is not a routine test, there identification of the at risk for complication may be missed, especially if there no implicative clinical features. The lipid test is often carried out using the serum, however, the use of saliva is secreted by the salivary gland, and as a screening medium, it offers more advantages over serum for the determination of lipid levels due to non-invasive nature of collection, reduced infectious risk, and ease with analysis. Its user-friendly nature would be acceptable by especially children and with this approach lipid test may be offered routinely and can be sustained for screening and follow up basis. This influences this study on the prevalence of dyslipidaemia and sociodemographic characteristics of serum and salivary lipids among apparently healthy primary school children aged 5-12years in Sokoto, Nigeria. Objectives: To determine the prevalence of dyslipidaemia comparing both serum and salivary lipids among apparently healthy primary school children aged 5-12years in Sokoto, Nigeria. Settings and Design: Descriptive and cross-sectional. Materials and Methods: A total of 200 apparently healthy primary school children aged 5-12 years. Who had no medical complaints or any major medical condition were recruited. The parameters assessed included serum and salivary; total cholesterol (TC), triglycerides (TG), high-density lipoproteins (HDL), and low-density lipoproteins (LDL). This was a descriptive study, from 3 public schools and 2 private schools in Sokoto using a multistage sampling technique. A structured study proforma was used for data collection. Lipid test was done using the conventional enzymatic spectrophotometric method of analyzing lipid. p value ≤0.05 was taken as statistically significant. Statistical Methods: descriptive analysis, test for associations and comparing means (ANOVA) Results: The mean age of the subjects was 8.4 (±2.29) years with a male to female ratio of 1:1.4. The prevalence of dyslipidemia among study group was 3%, 12%, 45%, and 9% for TC, TG, HDL and LDL respectively, with an overall prevalence of 57.0%, for serum fraction. The salivary fraction prevalence obtained was 20.5%, 17.5%, 76.0%, and 25.0%, for TC, TG, HDL, and LDL respectively, with an overall prevalence of 87.5% with variable statistical significance. Statistical significant findings were obtained for TC and TG, for serum lipid fractions. For salivary lipid fraction statistical significance was associated with social class and age respectively. Conclusion: Prevalence of dyslipidaemia is high using both serum and saliva Recommendation: screening for dyslipidaemia should be emphasized in primary schools to identify these at risk for dyslipidaemia at an early age.

Background/Objectives: Sexual health is shaped by lifestyle factors alongside biomedical determinants. This review synthesises evidence on physiotherapy, balneology/peloidotherapy, and diet therapy as preventive and therapeutic adjuncts for female sexual dysfunctions and related gynaecological conditions. Methods: A structured narrative review of PubMed and Google Scholar (June–July 2025) was conducted by three independent reviewers using predefined keywords in English and Polish. Case reports, preprints, and studies before 2015 were excluded. From 7322 records, 47 studies met the inclusion criteria for qualitative synthesis. Results: Physiotherapy—particularly pelvic floor muscle training, multimodal manual therapy, neuromuscular electrical stimulation (including PTNS), magnetostimulation, short-wave diathermy, and capacitive–resistive monopolar radiofrequency—was consistently associated with reductions in dyspareunia, chronic pelvic pain, and urinary symptoms, with parallel improvements in sexual function and quality of life. Balneological procedures (brine baths/irrigations, crenotherapy, selected radon/sulphide/iodine–bromine applications) and peloidotherapy demonstrated analgesic, anti-inflammatory, and perfusion-enhancing effects, with signals of benefit in vulvodynia, endometriosis, and infertility support. Dietary measures—higher fruit intake (notably citrus), adequate vitamin D, targeted omega-3 use in PCOS, a Mediterranean dietary pattern, and prudent red-meat limitation—were associated with favourable endocrine–metabolic profiles and, in selected contexts, reduced disease risk. Conclusions: Integrating lifestyle–medicine modalities with standard care may meaningfully prevent and manage female sexual dysfunctions by addressing pain, perfusion, neuromuscular control, and endocrine–metabolic drivers. Implementation frameworks and high-quality trials are warranted to refine indications, dosing, and long-term effectiveness.

Mahasiswa keperawatan sebagai calon tenaga kesehatan diharapkan menjadi teladan dalam perilaku hidup sehat. Namun, perilaku merokok masih ditemukan pada kelompok ini. Persepsi dampak merokok diduga mempengaruhi motivasi untuk berhenti merokok, meskipun hubungan antara keduanya belum sepenuhnya jelas. Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mengetahui persepsi dampak merokok dengan motivasi berhenti merokok pada mahasiswa keperawatan. Penelitian ini menggunakan desain deskriptif korelatif dengan pendekatan cross-sectional. Responden adalah 50 mahasiswa keperawatan perokok aktif yang dipilih secara sukarela. Persepsi dampak merokok diukur dengan kuesioner Perception of Smoking-Related Risks and Benefits, sedangkan motivasi berhenti merokok diukur menggunakan Richmond Test. Data dianalisis menggunakan uji korelasi Spearman. Mayoritas responden memiliki persepsi yang bervariasi, dengan sebagian besar menyadari risiko jangka pendek, namun masih ada persepsi yang keliru terkait manfaat sosial merokok. Motivasi berhenti merokok sebagian besar berada pada kategori sedang (60%). Hasil uji korelasi menunjukkan hubungan yang sangat lemah dan tidak signifikan secara statistik antara persepsi dampak merokok dengan motivasi berhenti merokok (r = -0,155; p = 0,283). Persepsi dampak merokok tidak memiliki hubungan yang signifikan dengan motivasi berhenti merokok pada mahasiswa keperawatan. Hal ini menunjukkan bahwa peningkatan persepsi saja tidak cukup untuk meningkatkan motivasi berhenti merokok tanpa intervensi tambahan, seperti dukungan sosial dan pengelolaan ketergantungan nikotin.

Latar Belakang: Vaksin pentavalen dapat menyebabkan demam sementara dalam 24 jam sebagai respons pembentukan kekebalan. Kompres lidah buaya, dengan kandungan air tinggi dan efek dingin alami, dapat membantu menurunkan suhu tubuh bayi. Penelitian ini bertujuan mengetahui pengaruh kompres lidah buaya terhadap suhu tubuh bayi pasca imunisasi pentavalent.Metode: Jenis ujian pra-eksplorasi dengan metodologi yang digunakan adalah one collection pre-test post-test tanpa kontrol. Terdapat 60 bayi di Wilayah PMB rejang lebong yang telah menerima vaksin pentavalen, dan digunakan metode simple random sampling untuk memilih sampel sebanyak 24 bayi. Menggunakan uji matched example t test.Hasil: Penelitian mengungkapkan bahwa, sebelum mendapat kompres lidah buaya setelah vaksinasi pentavalen, rata-rata suhu tubuh bayi adalah 37,6°C,. Rata-rata suhu tubuh bayi setelah mendapat kompres lidah buaya adalah 36,6°C,. Analisis data nilai p sebesar 0,000 (0,05) yang menunjukkan bahwa kompres lidah buaya berpengaruh signifikan terhadap suhu tubuh pasca vaksinasi pentavalent.Kesimpulan: Kompres lidah buaya efektif dalam menurunkan suhu tubuh bayi setelah imunisasi pentavalen. Intervensi ini dapat menjadi alternatif penanganan non farmakologis yang aman, mudah, dan murah mengatasi demam pasca vaksinasi.

Objetivo: Avaliar a associação entre deficiência de vitamina B12 e transtornos psíquicos em pacientes submetidos à cirurgia bariátrica, considerando implicações clínicas e de saúde pública. Métodos: Revisão integrativa realizada entre 2013 e 2023, com buscas sistemáticas nas bases MEDLINE/PubMed e LILACS. Foram utilizados descritores controlados do DeCS/MeSH combinados por operadores booleanos. O protocolo PRISMA orientou a seleção, conduzida por dois revisores independentes. Critérios de inclusão: artigos originais, texto completo, em inglês, português ou espanhol. Critérios de exclusão: duplicados, revisões narrativas e estudos sem desfechos psíquicos. Resultados: Identificaram-se 79 artigos, dos quais 19 foram incluídos. Observou-se prevalência de 20% a 50% de deficiência de vitamina B12, mais frequente no bypass gástrico em Y de Roux. Mulheres entre 30–50 anos apresentaram maior vulnerabilidade. As manifestações mais descritas foram depressão, ansiedade, déficit cognitivo, irritabilidade e, em casos graves, psicose e demência reversível. Considerações finais: A deficiência de vitamina B12 está fortemente associada a alterações psíquicas em pacientes pós-bariátricos. O monitoramento clínico-laboratorial contínuo e a suplementação precoce e individualizada são fundamentais para prevenir complicações neuropsiquiátricas e melhorar a qualidade de vida.

Purpose: This study examined the relationships between non-nursing tasks, missed nursing care, patient safety nursing activities, and medical errors.Methods: A cross-sectional survey was conducted with 168 nurses at a university hospital in Seoul using structured questionnaires. The collected data were analyzed using independent t-test, ANOVA, χ²-test, multiple regression analysis, binary logistic regression analysis, and the Hosmer- Lemeshow test with IBM SPSS 23.0.Results: The mean score for non-nursing tasks was 2.07±0.29 out of 3.0, and that for missed nursing care was 1.63±0.40 out of 4.0. The mean score for patient safety nursing activities was 4.51±0.42 out of 5.0, and fifty-one nurses had made a medical errors in the last six months. Missed nursing care had statistically significant negative correlations with patient safety nursing activities. Multiple regression analysis revealed that missed care accounted for 19.1% of patient safety nursing activities. Logistic regression analysis revealed that missed nursing care was a significant factor correlated with nurses’medical errors. Nurses with lower missed nursing care scores were more likely to perform patient safety nursing activities and were less likely to make medical errors.Conclusion: The findings showed that missed nursing care significantly affected patient safety nursing activities and medical errors. To enhance patient safety nursing activities and prevent medical errors, nurse managers should make efforts to reduce missed nursing care. Hospital management should ensure adequate staffing to maintain the quality of nursing care, and establish systems and policies to improve patient safety activities and prevent medical errors.

Bir eylemin gerçekleşmesinin başka bir eyleme bağlı olduğunu ifade eden şart cümleleri, gerek nahiv açısından gerekse belagat açısından Arap dilinin temel yapı taşlarından biridir. Şart cümleleri; şart edatı, şart fiili ve cevap unsurlarından oluşmaktadır. Şart cümlelerinde gerçekleşen hazf olgusu, şartın her unsurunda görülebilir. Bunlar arasında en çok hazfedilen ise cevap cümlesidir. Cevap cümlesi, cevabın kelamdan direkt anlaşıldığı yerlerde cevazen hazfedilmektedir. Şart fiilinin mâzi olduğu ve cevaba delalet eden lafzın şart edatından önce zikredildiği ya da şart cümlesini ihata ettiği yerlerde ise vücûben hazfedilmektedir. Cevabın hazfedildiği yerlerde genel olarak cevaba delalet eden bir karine ile iktifa edilirken bazen de cevap yerine cevabın delili/illeti geçmektedir. Cevabın delilinin cevap yerine kullanımına, özellikle şart ile cevap arasında zamansal uyumun sağlanmadığı veya sebep-sonuç ilişkisinin bulunmadığı durumlarda rastlanmaktadır. Bu tür kullanımlarda şarttan sonra gelen ifade, bazı dilcilere göre cevap, bazılarına göre delilü’l-cevâb yani cevabın delili olarak adlandırılmaktadır. Şiirlerde de kullanılan bu yapı, kelamın etki gücünü artırmasının yanı sıra belagat açısından kullanıldığı bağlama göre farklı amaçlar taşımaktadır. Bu çalışma, Kur’an’da cevabın delilinin cevap yerine geçmesinin hangi koşullarda gerçekleştiğini tespit etmeyi ve böylece Kur’an üslubunun anlaşılmasına katkı sunmayı amaçlamaktadır. Cevabın delili ile ilgili yapılan incelemeler sonucunda bazı bulgular elde edilmiştir. Şart ile cevap arasında sebep-sonuç ilişkisinin bulunmadığı ayetlerde cevabın mahzuf kabul edilmesinin, kelamın belagat yönünü ön plana çıkardığı; zamansal uyumsuzluğun olduğu ayetlerde ise anlam zenginliği sağladığı ve manaya derinlik kattığı tespit edilmiştir. Delilü’l-cevâbın cevap yerine geçmesi bazı çalışmalarda bir iki örnekle iktifa edilerek ele alınmıştır. Ancak bu çalışma, meseleyi kapsamlı bir analizle ele alarak Kur’an üsluplarından birinin daha anlaşılmasına katkı sunduğu ve belagat açısından sağladığı anlam zenginliklerini ortaya koyduğu için önemli bir çalışmadır ve literatürdeki mevcut boşluğu doldurmayı hedeflemektedir.

Introduction This study explored the experiences of medical students and lecturers with e-learning online resources on tropical medicine in Indonesia to find opportunities to enhance medical education. Methods This was a mixed-methods study conducted between July and September 2022. The study involved academic staff and students from 13 universities in Indonesia. The universities were selected using stratified random sampling with consideration of accreditation level and geographical location. A survey with a structured self-reported questionnaire was conducted among 888 undergraduate and clinical medical students. For the qualitative study, 19 students and 12 academic staff participated in focus group discussions until data saturation was reached. Quantitative data were analysed descriptively, while thematic analysis was used to analyse the qualitative data. Results/discussion Our study found that most of pre-clinical students never accessed a specific e-learning platform for tropical medicine (68.2%, n = 345), meanwhile, the majority of clinical students had ever accessed e-learning platforms (51.6%, n = 197) for tropical medicine, thus showing a statistically significant difference (p-value of &lt;0.001) between both groups. The most used resources to learn tropical medicine consisted of online journals by both pre-clinical (58.7%, n = 297) and clinical students (74.1%, n = 283). Online journals were said to help students a lot to understand tropical medicine concepts because of the quality information they provide. Google Scholar was the most common search engine used to seek information. While there was not yet a specific e-learning platform for tropical medicine, both pre-clinical (88.8%, n = 409) and clinical students (73.0%, n = 279) hoped for the improvement of e-learning platform quality (p-value of 0.006) that had existed. Students have the perception that e-learning has a role as a learning tool that can support them, especially clinical students, to reach their competence in tropical medicine, even though there are barriers related to infrastructural aspects, including internet access and limited user-friendly and local platforms on tropical medicine. Conclusion Preclinical and clinical students have the advantages of using e-learning on tropical medicine, even though there are some barriers related to access. However, specific e-learning platforms for tropical medicine are still very limited. Due to the importance of digital skills for the students as a medical professional in the future, there is an interest in developing a user-friendly e-learning platform specific for tropical medicine to facilitate medical students’ learning.

Introduction Continuing Health Education (CHE) is an essential strategy for the continuous qualification of Primary Health Care (PHC) professionals, promoting knowledge updating and improving the quality of services. In Brazil, this process is especially relevant given the challenges faced by the Unified Health System (SUS) and the need for training aligned with local demands. Understanding the impact of CHE actions in PHC is crucial to identify their effects on professional practice and health outcomes. Objective To identify and analyze the evidence on the impacts of CHE for health professionals in the context of Primary Health Care in Brazil. Method This is a scoping review conducted according to the Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI) guidelines and reported based on the PRISMA-ScR checklist. The search was performed in MEDLINE/PubMed, SciELO, LILACS, EMBASE, and Web of Science, and in gray literature through Google Scholar. Studies were selected independently by two researchers using Rayyan software. Results A total of 16 studies were included, of which 15 were scientific articles and one a doctoral thesis. Most of the CHE actions analyzed were carried out in person (56%), although technology-mediated online teaching and hybrid approaches have intensified in recent years. The studies covered a range of thematic areas, including family health, the prevention of sexually transmitted infections, child development, and the use of herbal medicines. The evaluation of the impact of CHE focused primarily on work process indicators – such as adherence to protocols, teamwork, and changes in professional practice – while health outcome indicators, such as improved prenatal care, vaccination coverage, and control of chronic diseases, were less frequently analyzed. Conclusion Continuing health education has a positive impact on the training of primary care professionals and the qualification of health services. However, measuring the effects of continuing education on health outcomes remains incipient, pointing to the need for more robust studies that assess long-term impacts. In addition, the expansion of flexible strategies, such as technology-mediated teaching and hybrid approaches, can contribute to greater equity in access to professional training, aligning with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and strengthening primary care in Brazil. Pre-registration

Postpartum depression (PPD) is a common mental health disorder affecting women after childbirth, but its risk varies across clinical and obstetric contexts. However, evidence regarding the association between CS-related maternal, socioeconomic, surgical, and neonatal factors and the development of PPD remains inconsistent. Objectives: To determine the frequency of PPD among women undergoing Caesarean section and its association with education level, socioeconomic status, type of Caesarean section, complications, history of mental health issues, and neonatal complications. Methods: This descriptive cross-sectional study was conducted at the Combined Military Hospital (CMH) Quetta from February 2025 to June 2025. A total of 91 postpartum women who delivered via Caesarean section were included using non-probability consecutive sampling. Data were collected using the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS) with a cutoff score of ≥13 to define PPD. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS version 26.0, and associations between PPD and categorical variables were assessed using the chi-square test. Results: The mean age of participants was 32.14 ± 8.34 years, and the average parity was 2.52±1.68. Postpartum depression was identified in 22 (24%) women. Stratified analysis showed no statistically significant association between PPD and education level (p=0.864), socioeconomic status (p=0.493), type of Caesarean section (p=0.978), complications (p=0.656), history of mental health issues (p=0.794), or neonatal complications (p=0.895). Conclusions: The prevalence of PPD among women undergoing Caesarean section was 24%. However, no significant associations were found with maternal, socioeconomic, surgical, or neonatal factors (all p&gt;0.05). Routine screening and psychological support are essential to address PPD effectively.

Acute perforated appendicitis is a serious condition associated with higher morbidity, prolonged hospital stays, and increased risk of complications. Understanding postoperative outcomes is crucial for optimizing patient care, improving clinical decision-making, and reducing healthcare burdens. Objective: To determine the postoperative outcomes of acute perforated appendicitis during index hospital admission. Methods: This descriptive study was conducted at the Department of Surgery, Khyber Teaching Hospital, Peshawar, from October 1, 2024, to July 31, 2025. Male and female patients aged 18 to 60 years diagnosed with acute perforated appendicitis were enrolled. The patients were evaluated for postoperative outcomes, recorded in terms of surgical site infection, wound dehiscence, hospital stay, and intestinal obstruction. Data analysis was carried out using SPSS version 26.0. Results: The Mean age of the participants was 33.91 ± 11.834 years, while the mean hospital stay was 7.12 ± 2.721 days. Most of the patients were male (n=101, 67.8%). Retrocecal position of the appendix was frequently recorded in 98 patients (65.8%). Hospital stay more than seven days was observed in 57 patients (38.3%), followed by surgical site infection (n=47, 31.5%). Wound dehiscence was the least frequently recorded in 21 patients (14.1%). Conclusions: Acute perforated appendicitis was associated with increased occurrence of postoperative complications and morbidities. Male patients with advanced age were more likely to experience prolonged hospital stay and surgical site infection.

Peri-prosthetic late hematoma following breast implant procedure is defined as a hematoma presenting longer than 6 months after operation and is a rare complication with sporadic cases reported throughout literature. We present a case of an 85-year-old patient who developed a spontaneous late hematoma nearly 20 years following implant-based breast reconstruction and adjuvant chemotherapy to illustrate the importance of maintaining a wide differential when approaching a chest wall mass that cannot be biopsied in a patient who has previously received breast implants. MRI revealed a peri-implant effusion with a heterogeneous mixed signal partially enhancing mass measuring 3.2 x 4.3 x 1.7 cm, posterior to the left breast implant. The patient had bilateral Mentor smooth, round, silicone, 350 cc implants in the submuscular plane. Ultrasound-guided biopsy was attempted and unsuccessful due to inability to displace the implant and access the mass, indicating the need for an open biopsy. The patient underwent radical left chest wall mass excision of the posterior implant capsule, removal of the left implant, and closure of the anterior capsule. Final pathology confirmed the diagnosis of organized hematoma. Immunophenotyping flow cytometry was utilized to rule out BIA-ALCL or BIA-SCC. Our case is unique in that biopsy was unable to be obtained given retro-implant position of the mass and that the diagnosis and etiology of late hematoma formation following smooth round silicone implants has been infrequently discussed in literature. Providing a comprehensive workup considering patient history, physical exam findings, imaging, and pathology ensures a wide differential optimizing patient outcomes.

Rapid and effective clearance of apoptotic cells, known as efferocytosis, is essential for maintaining tissue homeostasis. Efferocytosis removes apoptotic cells before the occurrence of membrane rupture from which the cell contents, often inflammatory and toxic, are released into surrounding tissues. Through this way, efferocytosis protects the surrounding tissues from toxic enzymes and oxides inside the apoptotic cells as well as from cellular contents such as anti-proteinase and cystatins. Driven by the ongoing advancements in bioinformatics and molecular biology, many researchers have explored the mechanism of efferocytosis and its association with systemic diseases. Multiple studies have demonstrated that impaired efferocytosis mechanisms significantly contribute to the onset and progression of chronic inflammation. The presence of chronic inflammation significantly exacerbates the advancement of cardiovascular diseases, including atherosclerosis, myocardial infarction, heart failure subsequent to myocardial infarction, and even myocarditis. This review aims to provide a brief introduction to the mechanisms involved in cellular efferocytosis, followed by an examination of the molecular and pathway aspects of efferocytosis with the risk of cardiovascular diseases, contributing to the identification of potential therapeutic targets for related diseases.

Bu derleme çalışması geroaşkınlık kavramı ve kavramın hemşirelikte kullanımı ile ilgili bir perspektif oluşturmak amacıyla yapılmıştır. Geroaşkınlık kavramı ‘dünyaya dair materyalist ve rasyonel bir bakış açısından, daha kozmik ve aşkın bir bakış açısına doğru bir değişim’ olarak tanımlanmaktadır. Geroaşkınlık, herkes için mümkün olan doğal bir gelişim süreci olarak kabul edilir. Genç yetişkinlikten sonra geroaşkınlığa doğru hareketin yaşam boyu ve sürekli olduğu varsayılır. Geroaşkınlık sürecinde deneyimlenen değişiklikler bireyin kendini ve başkalarıyla olan ilişkilerini yeniden tanımlamasını ve temel varoluşsal sorunlara dair yeni bir anlayış edinmesini sağlar. Deneyimlenen değişiklikler kozmik boyut, benlik boyutu, sosyal ve kişisel ilişkiler boyutu olmak üzere üç boyutta ele alınır. Geroaşkınlık teorisinin yaşlı bireyler için uygun hemşirelik bakım modelleri geliştirmede yeni pratik fikirler sunabileceği ifade edilmektedir. Hemşireler, yaşlı bireylerin değişen düşünce ve davranış biçimlerini doğru bir biçimde algılayabilmek ve bu bireylere sunacakları bakım faaliyetlerini zenginleştirmek için geroaşkınlık kavramından yararlanılarak oluşturulan kılavuzlardan yararlanabilir. Yaşlı bireylerin bakımında geroaşkınlık teorisinden türetilen kılavuzların kullanımının, hemşirelerin olumlu yaşlanmayı teşvik etmesine katkı sağlayacağı ifade edilmektedir. Bu bilgiler ışığında hemşirelik bakımına yeni bir perspektif kazandırma potansiyeline sahip geroaşkınlığın yer aldığı eğitim, uygulama ve araştırmaların yapılması önerilebilir.

Metode kontrasepsi jangka panjang (MKJP) meliputi intra uterine device (IUD) atau alat kontrasepsi dalam rahim (AKDR), implan, vasektomi atau metode operasi pria (MOP), serta tubektomi atau metode operasi wanita (MOW). Sementara itu, metode non-MKJP mencakup kondom, suntikan, dan pil. Dalam memilih serta menggunakan metode kontrasepsi, wanita perlu mempertimbangkan berbagai faktor, seperti kondisi kesehatan dan potensi efek samping. Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mengetahui hubungan antara pengetahuan dan sikap ibu dengan penggunaan metode kontrasepsi jangka panjang (MKJP) di Puskesmas Baiturrahman Banda Aceh. Jenis penelitian ini menggunakan metode survei analitik dengan desain cross sectional. Pengambilan sampel dilakukan dengan teknik purposive sampling, dan jumlah responden yang terlibat dalam penelitian ini adalah sebanyak 98 orang. Analisis data menggunakan uji univariat dan bivariat. Hasil uji uji univariat menunjukkan distribusi frekuensi penggunaan MKJP yaitu sebesar (57%) dan paling banyak menggunakan MKJP IUD (29%). Pengetahuan ibu terhadap penggunaan MKJP paling banyak pada kategori kurang (56%) dan sikap ibu terhadap penggunaan MKJP paling banyak pada kategori kurang (58%). Hasil uji bivariat menggunakan uji statistik chi-square. Hasil penelitian yaitu terdapat hubungan pengetahuan terhadap penggunaan MKJP (p = 0,000 &lt; α (0,05)), terdapat hubungan sikap terhadap penggunaan MKJP (p = 0,00 &lt; α (0,05)) dan terdapat hubungan pengetahuan dan sikap terhadap penggunaan MKJP (p = 0,00 &lt; α (0,05)). Penelitian ini menyimpulkan bahwa terdapat hubungan antara pengetahuan dan sikap ibu terhadap penggunaan metode kontrasepsi jangka panjang (MKJP) di Puskesmas Baiturrahman Banda Aceh.

Cervical artery dissection is an uncommon but important cause of ischemic stroke in young adults. Severe cough or infection may precipitate arterial injury through mechanical stress or inflammation. We report the case of a 35-year-old man who presented with sudden severe posterior neck pain and headache after severe coughing during COVID-19. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and angiography revealed infarction of the left middle cerebral artery and stenosis of the left carotid and vertebral arteries with aneurysmal dilatation. Vessel wall MRI revealed intramural hematomas in the left internal carotid artery and both vertebral arteries, confirming the diagnosis of multiple arterial dissections. The patient was treated with dual antiplatelet therapy, and his clinical condition subsequently improved. This case highlights that a cough associated with COVID-19 may trigger cervical artery dissection and that vessel wall MRI helps detect intramural hematomas in the subacute phase.

Infertility is a disease of the reproductive system. It makes a person unable to have children. It can affect both man and women. Any dysfunction in the reproductive system may lead to infertility. Infertility in males is observed as one of the major problem faced by several advanced countries. Over the past several years, a decline in male reproductive health has been reported. Globally, it has been noticed that the incidences of testicular cancer (TC) and poor sperm quality is increasing with time. Certain drugs, lifestyle, tobacco, smoking and alcohol all have a short and long term health effects, including effects detrimental to the production and quality of sperms. In his review we have tried to through some light on the important factors such as lifestyle factors and environmental factors, that can greatly influence over all health wellbeing including fertility.

La labor y participación de los docentes es crucial y necesaria desde todos los puntos de vista, ya que son ellos el primer filtro y la relación más importante que debe tener el adolescente en relación a su aprendizaje, debido a que son ellos quienes derivan a los estudiantes por las múltiples situaciones que pueden acontecer. La presente investigación es de tipo cualitativo-descriptivo, ya que el estudio se orienta al análisis, desarrollo y orientación desde una perspectiva psicoeducativa sobre el funcionamiento y apoyo de parte del desempeño de los docentes y su vínculo con el educando, aportando diferentes y distintas formas de intervenir, permitiendo una visión más amplia sobre las estructuras psíquicas y constitución subjetiva del mismo. Es importante que las acciones y estrategias desarrolladas se encaminan al apoyo emocional en las diferentes etapas evolutivas de la vida a través de la escucha activa, los grupos de apoyo monosintomático, las entrevistas dirigidas y las reuniones interinstitucionales, entre otras. Como conclusión, se debe priorizar los vínculos, cuando se den casos de adolescentes con síntomas marcados por características tan naturalizados por su propio ser, es decir, señales condicionadas por la disminución de la motivación hacia la adquisición del nuevo conocimiento.

Bencana hidrometeorologi berupa banjir bandang dan tanah longsor yang terjadi di Kabupaten Tanah Datar dan wilayah lain di Sumatera Barat pada akhir tahun 2025 menyebabkan kerusakan infrastruktur, terganggunya pemenuhan kebutuhan dasar, serta peningkatan risiko kesehatan bagi masyarakat terdampak. Kondisi ini menempatkan kelompok rentan seperti anak, ibu hamil dan menyusui, serta lansia pada situasi kerentanan ganda karena keterbatasan akses pangan, air bersih, sanitasi, dan dukungan psikososial. Program pengabdian ini bertujuan untuk memberikan bantuan sembako, penyediaan hygiene kit, edukasi kesehatan lingkungan, serta dukungan psikososial bagi komunitas terdampak di salah satu nagari di Kabupaten Tanah Datar. Metode yang digunakan meliputi asesmen kebutuhan cepat, koordinasi dengan pemerintah nagari dan relawan, pengadaan dan distribusi sembako serta hygiene kit, penyuluhan kebersihan dan sanitasi pascabencana, serta kegiatan dukungan psikososial berbasis komunitas. Keberhasilan program diukur secara deskriptif dari cakupan penerima manfaat, partisipasi warga dalam kegiatan edukasi, dan respons subjektif penyintas terhadap bantuan yang diberikan. Hasil kegiatan menunjukkan bahwa 210 keluarga menerima bantuan sembako dan hygiene kit, terjadi peningkatan pemahaman sederhana mengenai praktik kebersihan dan penggunaan air bersih, serta partisipasi aktif anak dan perempuan dalam sesi dukungan psikososial. Program ini menunjukkan bahwa kolaborasi antara perguruan tinggi, pemerintah nagari, dan relawan dapat berkontribusi nyata terhadap pemenuhan kebutuhan dasar dan pemulihan awal penyintas bencana, sekaligus menjadi model pengabdian berbasis komunitas yang dapat direplikasi pada kejadian bencana serupa. Kata kunci: bencana, Tanah Datar, sembako, dukungan psikososial, komunitas

Endoscopic skull base surgery has become widely accepted due to the advantages of the minimally invasive approach and achievement of outcomes that are comparable to those from open approaches. Given limited visualization of this region on clinical examination, preoperative planning relies heavily on diagnostic imaging to determine the optical surgical approach and the intended extent of resection. Within this context, high-resolution CT and MRI provide valuable information regarding the pathology, its relationship to critical structures, and other pertinent anatomic considerations. This Special Series Review describes the role of imaging in advanced endoscopic endonasal skull base surgeries, addressing clinically relevant normal and variant anatomy, key surgical landmarks, and pertinent red flags that serve as cautionary imaging findings. We discuss common pathologies occurring along these anatomic corridors and outline the core steps for specific surgical approaches. It is essential for interpreting radiologists to have a thorough understanding of the key anatomic structures and their relationships to pathology, to help surgeons select the appropriate EEA corridor, optimize the extent of resection, minimize surgical risk, and determine reconstruction options.

Gummy vitamin is one of the trending sectors of vitamin supplements in this modern era. It has been variedly marketed with health claims and widely accepted and consumed by both children and adults. Anemia is one of the main concerns for females of the reproductive age group, so it is important to administer supplements to enhance their quality of life. Presently, society is eager to opt for fancy ways of consuming vitamin supplements instead of following traditional methods like tablets, capsules, or dietary sources. The consumer preference is shifting more towards chewy, palatable, sweet gummies to recover their vitamin deficiency. To prove this, a consumer preference survey study was conducted on 66 participants between the age group of 13-45, and their responses collected were analyzed.

Background: Severe acute malnutrition (SAM) prevalence in India has increased over the last decade. SAM children are admitted to nutritional rehabilitation centres (NRCs) for medical complications. NRCs have successfully achieved weight gain among SAM children; however, long-term weight gain is difficult to maintain. This study aimed to explore caregivers’ and stakeholders’ perceptions of the treatment interventions offered at NRCs in Bhubaneswar. Methods: The research used qualitative methods, where nine in-depth interviews (IDIs) were conducted using a semi-structured interview guide among mothers of SAM children and their stakeholders. Transcripts from the recorded IDIs were prepared in English. ATLAS.ti version 7 software was used for in-depth thematic analysis using an inductive approach to generate top codes, sub-themes, and major themes. The study was approved ethically with written informed consent from the participants. Results: The study found three major themes: perceived improvement in their child's health, a sense of being welcomed and cared for, and challenges, along with a reluctance to accept intervention. Caregivers reported improvements in children’s health, including better adherence to daily routines, increased food intake, and notable weight gain. However, challenges included unfamiliarity with NRC environments, concerns about family care during their stay, and societal reluctance towards government health interventions. Stakeholders’ perspectives focused on the quality and effectiveness of services and interventions, and systemic hindrances to service provision. Conclusions: Our findings suggest that community-level challenges persist in delivering NRC services. Public health measures are needed to increase awareness in the community about the prevention and management of SAM children.

The aging process is associated with a progressive decline in physical, psychological, and social functions, which increases the vulnerability of older adults to personal hygiene and self-care problems. This community service initiative was designed to empower elderly individuals through educational interventions promoting simple and practical self-care of the hair, eyes, nails, and feet. The program was implemented at the “Juara” Elderly School, Lengkong District, Bandung City, in collaboration with the Indonesian Elderly Association (LLI). A participatory learning approach was adopted, combining interactive lectures, focused group discussions, and direct demonstrations to facilitate experiential learning. Evaluation of pre- and post-education assessments revealed a 35% improvement in participants’ knowledge regarding personal hygiene practices. In addition, qualitative observations indicated increased enthusiasm, confidence, and independence among participants in performing self-care routines. The activity demonstrated that structured health education for the elderly can effectively promote healthy aging, reduce dependency, and enhance overall well-being. The outcomes of this program highlight the importance of community-based participatory approaches in empowering the elderly to maintain dignity and quality of life through improved self-care management.

Abstract Emergence of therapeutic resistance is a critical clinical challenge in cancer treatment, contributing to treatment failure, disease relapse, and overall poor prognosis. Adaptive therapy (AT), a resistance management strategy, aims to address this issue by selectively applying therapeutic pressure to promote competition between therapy-sensitive and therapy-resistant clones, allowing for long-term control of tumor burden. AT relies upon the assumption that resistance comes at some fitness cost in the absence of therapy. Is that assumption justified? We conducted a systematic review of the literature on experimental tests of the fitness cost of therapeutic resistance. We conducted a search for peer-reviewed papers that fulfilled the following selection criteria: (i) experiments of direct competition, (ii) between therapy-resistant and therapy-sensitive clones, (iii) in a therapy-free environment. We found 47 experiments that matched those criteria. Of those experiments, approximately two-thirds (68%) found a fitness cost to resistance in a competitive environment. Of all pooled features from the studies reviewed, we found that the resistance characteristic was most significantly associated with whether resistant clones exhibited a fitness advantage in competition (p=0.0147). Further, we identify complex ecological interactions that may influence the behavior of the cancer cell population without selection by therapeutic pressure. Predicting which resistance characteristics can be exploited therapeutically with AT and identifying potential methods of modulating the costliness of the resistant phenotype may be critical to future improvements in cancer therapy. Lay Summary When cancer cells evolve to no longer respond to a cancer therapy, do they pay a cost for that invulnerability? We reviewed experiments where cancer cells resistant to a therapy were pitted against cancer cells that were still sensitive to the therapy. Approximately ⅔ of the experiments showed that the sensitive cells could out-compete the resistant cells, implying that the latter were paying some cost for their ability to resist the therapy.

Introduction: Prostaglandin D2 (PGD2) is elevated in the bald scalp of men with androgenetic alopecia (AGA) and inhibits hair growth. Cetirizine, an H1-antihistamine, reduces PGD2 production and has anti-inflammatory effects, making it a potential therapeutic candidate. Methods: Ten men aged 18–60 years with Norwood–Hamilton grade III vertex to V AGA applied 1 ml of 1% cetirizine in propylene glycol/butylene glycol daily for 16 weeks. Exclusion criteria included recent use of minoxidil, finasteride, or other antiandrogenic therapies. Hair counts in a 1 cm² tattoo-marked vertex area and blinded photographic assessments were evaluated at baseline and week 16. Results: Nine participants completed the study. Mean hair count increased from 139.6 (SE 13.9) to 163.4 (SE 15.5), a statistically significant change (p = 0.009). Blinded global photographs showed a +2 improvement in one patient, +1 in two, and no change in six. Trichoscopic counts improved in all patients. No adverse events occurred. Conclusion: Despite limitations, this report provides additional real-world data supporting cetirizine as a potential therapy in AGA. Larger randomized controlled studies with longer follow-up are needed to establish efficacy, durability, and mechanism of action.

Abstract Objective Lymphoepithelial carcinoma of the salivary gland (LECSG) is a rare malignancy. The purpose of this study is to evaluate the clinical features of LECSG with a focus on the role of Epstein‐Barr virus (EBV). Data Sources PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, institutional pathology Natural Language search tool. Review Methods Retrospective review of patients diagnosed with LECSG at a single institution and a systematic literature review. Full text articles in English were included. Results 285 cases of LECSG identified via literature review and an additional 10 within our institution. Most tumors were in the parotid gland (70.5%). Lymph node metastasis was observed in 28%. Most cases were in Asian or Inuit patients (70.5%). EBV association was positive in 52%, and 87.6% of these were in endemic populations. Treatment primarily involved surgical resection (65.8%), often combined with adjuvant therapy (50.2%). No significant differences in disease‐free survival (DFS) or disease‐specific survival (DSS) were observed by EBV status. Advanced tumor stage was associated with worse DFS ( P &lt; .0001) and worse DSS ( P &lt; .0001). Lymph node metastasis was also associated with reduced DSS ( P = .04). Independent predictors of poorer DFS and DSS included late tumor and endemic region of origin. Conclusion This comprehensive analysis of 295 salivary gland LEC cases provides valuable insights into the clinical behavior, pathological features, and treatment outcomes of this rare malignancy. The study highlights the potential role of EBV in tumor pathogenesis, particularly in endemic populations, and emphasizes the need for further research to establish optimal management strategies.

Background/Objectives: Portal vein tumor thrombus (PVTT) is a severe complication of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and is associated with poor outcomes. This study aimed to describe the imaging and clinical characteristics observed among HCC patients with PVTT who survived longer than one year following combined systemic therapy and radiotherapy. Methods: This retrospective, single-center study included 26 consecutive HCC patients with PVTT who survived more than one year after combined treatment. Baseline characteristics included PVTT extent classified according to the Liver Cancer Study Group of Japan—VP1 (segmental portal vein invasion), VP2 (second-order portal vein invasion), VP3 (first-order portal vein invasion), and VP4 (main portal trunk or contralateral PV invasion) and liver function assessed by Child–Pugh class and ALBI grade. Contrast-enhanced CT or MRI was evaluated at baseline and 6 months after treatment using RECIST 1.1 criteria. Results: The cohort was predominantly male (69%), and most patients had extensive PVTT (VP3–VP4, n = 19). Preserved liver function was common at baseline (Child–Pugh class A, n = 24; ALBI grade I, n = 14). Tumor response was observed in 23 patients (88%) during follow-up. Frequently observed post-treatment imaging findings included portal vein recanalization (n = 12), collateral circulation (present in 7 patients at baseline and 6 at follow-up), and compensatory liver hypertrophy (n = 6). Conclusions: Among HCC patients with PVTT who survived longer than one year after combined therapy, portal vein recanalization, collateral circulation, and compensatory liver hypertrophy were commonly observed imaging features. Given the retrospective design and survivor-selection nature of the study, these findings should be interpreted as descriptive observations rather than evidence of treatment efficacy or prognostic determinants.

U radu su prikazani rezultati pedoloških istraživanja u sastojinama Pančićeve omorike (Picea omorika /Panč./Purkyne) zahvaćenih požarima i dijelovi koji nisu opožareni, kao i drugih tretmana primjenjenih u projektu Franklinia (2021–2023). Cilj istraživanja u ovom radu je prikaz fizičkih i hemijskih osobina na tretiranim dijelovima sastojina i pedološka klasifikacija profila. Istraživanjem je analizirano 8 pedoloških profila, od kojih je 7 analizirano i laboratorijski. Pedološki profili su otvoreni na lokalitetima Tesla, Gostilja, Veliki Stolac, Studenac i Trenice. Pet analiziranih profila pripada tipu koluvijuma, a po 1 profil pripada tipovima crnica na krečnjaku, kalkokambisol i eutrični kambisol. Dubina analiziranih profila kod koluvijuma kreće se od 30 do 40 cm. Po pravilu su to vrlo skeletna zemljišta (10-75%). Teksturni sastav analiziranih profila kreće se od praškastih ilovača kod koluvijuma i crnice, preko pjeskovito-glinovitih ilovača kod kalkokambisola, do glinuša kod eutričnog kambisola. Sadržaj humusa svih analiziranih profila je visok. Reakcije zemljišta u vodi kreću se od neutralne do umjereno alkalne. Obezbjeđenost lakopristupačnim oblicima fosfora i kalijuma u granicama je od slabe do srednje. Potencijal istraživanih zemljišta za rast i razvoj sastojina omorika je ograničen, najviše zbog skeletnosti.

&lt;p&gt;Supplementary Figure S4&lt;/p&gt;

Abstract Objectives To evaluate the clinical performance of a cadmium-zinc-telluride-(CZT-) based photon-counting computed tomography (PCCT) system for low-dose lung cancer screening (LCS-LDCT) using patient-specific 3D-printed lung phantoms, and to compare its image quality and radiomics consistency with a conventional energy-integrating detector CT (EIDCT) system. Methods Six 3D-printed lung phantoms, derived from patient CT datasets and representing various lesion types (solid, part-solid, and ground-glass), were imaged on PCCT and EIDCT scanners at matched dose levels (1.6 - 20.4 mGy). Quantitative image metrics, Hounsfield unit (HU) accuracy, image noise, and contrast-to-noise ratio (CNR), were assessed across dose levels. Radiomic features were extracted for each lesion and analyzed via principal component analysis to quantify feature consistency (within-cluster distance) and lesion type separability. Results PCCT demonstrated significantly lower image noise and higher CNR compared with EIDCT, particularly at lower dose levels. HU values were consistent across doses for both systems, with reduced variability in PCCT (coefficient of variation &lt; 0.004). Radiomics analysis revealed tighter clustering (reduced within-cluster distances) and comparable lesion type separability between PCCT and EIDCT, indicating enhanced feature stability and lesion differentiation. Qualitative review confirmed superior lesion conspicuity and margin delineation with PCCT. Conclusions CZT-based PCCT outperforms conventional EIDCT in quantitative and qualitative imaging metrics for LCS-LDCT, enabling superior image quality and radiomics reproducibility at reduced radiation doses. These findings support the clinical translation of PCCT for lung cancer screening and radiomics-based lesion characterization. Key points PCCT offers reduced image noise and improved CNR performance, especially at ultra-low doses. HU stability and radiomics reproducibility are enhanced with PCCT. Clinical relevance statement PCCT may enable further dose reduction without compromising diagnostic accuracy in LCS-LDCT.

<title>Abstract</title> Background Yobe State in Northeast Nigeria has been affected by protracted armed conflict, leading to a weakened health system and population displacement. The emergence of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 and recent recurrent seasonal flooding have further compounded the region’s vulnerabilities. These overlapping crises created favourable conditions for cholera transmission. Despite multiple outbreaks, the epidemiology of cholera within this complex context remains poorly documented. This study examines the epidemiological burden, spatial patterns, and temporal trends of cholera outbreaks in the state from 2020 to 2024. Methodology: We conducted a retrospective cross-sectional study using cholera surveillance data from 2020 to 2024. Socio-demographic characteristics, temporal trends, and spatial patterns were analyzed. Spatial autocorrelation (Global Moran’s I), Local Indicators of Spatial Association (LISA), and Hotspot Analysis (Getis-Ord Gi*) were used to assess geographic clustering of cholera incidence across wards and Local Government Areas (LGAs). Results A total of 6,792 cholera cases and 178 deaths were reported during the study period, with an overall case fatality rate (CFR) of 2.6%. The largest outbreak occurred in 2021 (3,973 cases [58.5%]), followed by 2022 (2,297 cases [33.8%]), and least in 2024 (522 cases [7.7%]). Cholera incidences peaked during the rainy season, particularly in August. The overall mean age was 24.4 ± 17.3 years, with a slight female preponderance (52.3%). Mortality was highest among individuals aged above 60 years (CFR, 6.7%). Global Moran’s I revealed statistically significant spatial clustering (p &lt; 0.01). LISA and Getis-Ord Gi* analyses identified persistent hotspots in densely populated and flood-prone, urban and peri-urban settlements. Conclusion Yobe State experienced a considerable burden of cholera in recent years, driven by conflict, population displacement, seasonal flooding, and post-COVID-19 pandemic challenges. Findings from this study suggest that strengthening Water Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) infrastructure, enhancing surveillance, and integrating cholera control into broader humanitarian responses are critical in reducing future outbreaks.

Late pregnancy is a critical phase because the risk of complications such as preeclampsia, bleeding, infection, and premature rupture of membranes increases, making early detection of Early Warning Signs (EWS) highly important. This case study aims to describe the implementation of the 10T-based midwifery care approach and its role in early detection in a pregnant woman, Mrs. D, G2P1A0, at 32 weeks of gestation who visited Rijali Health Center for routine antenatal care. Data were collected through interviews, observation, physical examination, and supporting examinations. The assessment showed that the mother and fetus were in good condition without any pregnancy danger signs; complaints of frequent urination and sleep disturbances were physiological discomforts of the third trimester. Blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg, fetal heart rate of 148 bpm, fundal height of 25 cm, and hemoglobin level of 11.8 g/dL indicated a low-risk physiological pregnancy. The application of the 10T components—including physical measurements, laboratory evaluation, management of complaints, iron supplementation, tetanus immunization, counseling on danger signs, and documentation in the maternal health book—proved helpful for midwives in conducting early detection and preventing complications. Education regarding rest patterns, nutrition, and warning signs increased the mother’s preparedness for childbirth. In conclusion, 10T-based midwifery care is effective in maintaining maternal well-being and supporting early detection of obstetric risks in late pregnancy. Pregnant women are advised to attend ANC regularly, consume iron supplements, and understand danger signs, while midwives should continue implementing the 10T components thoroughly and providing comprehensive counseling.

Common mental disorders (CMDs), such as depressive and anxiety disorders, constitute a significant public health problem in low- and middle-income countries, such as India, where they rank among the leading causes of disability and impaired quality of life. Outcomes are further compromised by a large treatment gap, poor adherence to therapeutic regimens, and high attrition rates. The prevalence and severity of CMDs are disproportionately higher in women. Additionally, structural factors influencing healthcare access, along with sociocultural factors, such as gender-based violence, limited autonomy in healthcare decisions, and greater levels of discrimination and stigma, result in poorer outcomes among women with CMDs. Therefore, there is a pressing need for care packages that are culturally sensitive, gender-responsive, and designed to address these structural and sociocultural factors, as highlighted in the literature from India.

Objective: The objective of this study was to assess the comparative effectiveness of topical Tazarotene 0.1% gel and weekly oral Fluconazole in the treatment of onychomycosis. Study Design: Comparative prospective study. Place and Duration of Study: Pak-Emirates Military Hospital, Rawalpindi, Pakistan, from July 2023 to Dec 2023. Methodology: A total of 114 patients fulfilling the inclusion criteria were included in the research. A detailed history, dermatological examination, dermoscopy, and calculation of the Onychomycosis Severity Index (OSI) were employed in each patient to record the severity of their disease. The patients were randomized into two groups, i.e., Group-A, where twice daily application of topical Tazarotene 0.1% gel was applied for three months, and Group-B, where weekly oral Fluconazole tablet of 150mg was administered for three months. The Potassium Hydroxide mounts from nail material was performed at the end of treatment period in all the patients. Results: Of the total, 53(46.5%) were male and 61(53.5%) were female. Following the comparison between two groups, a statistically significant difference was observed, suggesting that treatment with weekly oral Fluconazole (Group-B) had higher effectiveness and better treatment success compared to topical Tazarotene 0.1% gel (Group-A) in terms of the fall in the degree of OSI, dermoscopic findings, clinical evaluation, and potassium hydroxide (KOH) mount after treatment. Conclusions: The effectiveness of Oral weekly Fluconazole is significantly higher than topical Tazarotene 0.1% gel in onychomycosis.

The opioid crisis continues to impact millions across the United States, with women facing unique challenges in both the development of opioid use disorder (OUD) and the pursuit of recovery. This study explores justice-involved women’s experiences in sober living homes (SLHs), examining the organizational, societal, individual, and behavioral health factors influencing their recovery journeys. Through in-depth interviews and focus groups, the study found that many women were first introduced to opioids through legitimate medical prescriptions and faced significant barriers to accessing and sustaining treatment. Challenges such as limited treatment availability, stigma, particularly for pregnant and parenting women, unstable housing, and unaddressed trauma were common themes. Despite these obstacles, participants emphasized the critical role of sober living homes in providing structure, support, and opportunities for rebuilding their lives. The findings underscore the need for expanded access to women-centered recovery housing for justice-involved women and the integration of trauma-informed care into treatment programs.

<title>Abstract</title> Objective: The widespread adoption of medical thoracoscopy across various hospital settings has significantly improved the diagnostic rate for exudative pleural effusion. However, challenges persist in identifying rare etiologies, such as disorders of lymphatic circulation. This article aims to examine the diagnostic approach for these pleural effusions to enhance clinical diagnostic and treatment capabilities. Methods: We retrospectively analyzed the clinical data of two patients with rare pleural effusions admitted to our hospital, in whom the etiology remained unclear following conventional medical thoracoscopy. A review of the relevant literature was also conducted. Results: Both patients presented with exudative pleural effusion; however, medical thoracoscopy and pleural biopsy revealed chronic inflammation. The final diagnoses for the two patients were Yellow Nail Syndrome (YNS) and chylous pleural effusion, respectively. The literature review indicates that the etiology of such conditions is often associated with dysfunction of the lymphatic system, and conventional pleural biopsy has a low positive rate, making lymphangiography a more effective diagnostic method. Conclusion: For pleural effusions with an unclear diagnosis following medical thoracoscopy, it is crucial to expand diagnostic considerations. If the etiology remains undetermined after comprehensive routine pleural fluid analysis and pleural biopsy, rare diseases related to lymphatic circulation disorders should be contemplated. Thorough history-taking, systematic physical examination, and targeted auxiliary tests, such as lymphangiography, are essential for achieving a definitive diagnosis.

Only 7.69% of the cases were allowed for an accurate dose evaluation. The ingested poison dose based on empirical and simulated ingestion evaluation were correlated with blood toxicant concentrations and prognosis in patients with PQP. Factors, such as sex and height, should be considered by physicians in empirical evaluation. It is still a great clinical challenge to accurately evaluate the ingested dose of liquid pesticides.

Menyusui penting bagi pertumbuhan bayi, namun ibu post partum sectio caesarea sering mengalami hambatan. Studi kasus ini menggambarkan asuhan keperawatan pada ibu dengan masalah menyusui tidak efektif di ruang Bougenvile RSUD dr. R. Goeteng Taroenadibrata Purbalingga menggunakan pendekatan studi kasus melalui tahap pengkajian, diagnosa, intervensi, implementasi, dan evaluasi dengan data dari wawancara, observasi, pemeriksaan fisik, dan dokumentasi. Hasil menunjukkan keluhan ASI kurang lancar, payudara bengkak, dan bayi sulit melekat. Intervensi berupa edukasi perawatan payudara, konseling menyusui, serta pijat Woolwich. Setelah tiga hari, produksi ASI meningkat dari 10 ml menjadi 30 ml, pembengkakan berkurang, dan perlekatan bayi membaik. Evaluasi menunjukkan masalah menyusui tidak efektif pada pasien berhasil teratasi.

Objective: This study aimed to evaluate the stability of cement-augmented pedicle screws in patients with osteoporosis of the thoracolumbar spine, with a focus on reducing mechanical failures compared with non-augmented screws.Methods: A retrospective analysis was conducted on 119 patients who underwent thoracolumbar fusion surgery between 2011 and 2022. The incidence of mechanical failures—including pull-out, screw loosening, and cage protrusion—was compared between patients treated with cement-augmented pedicle screws and those without augmentation.Results: Cement augmentation was associated with a significant reduction in overall mechanical failures. The incidence of mechanical failure was significantly lower in the cement-augmented group compared with the non-augmented group (20.4% vs. 41.4%, p=0.018). Although individual complications such as pull-out, cage protrusion, and screw loosening were less frequent in the cement-augmented group, these differences were not statistically significant. However, the overall reduction in mechanical failures was statistically significant. Fusion rates were higher in the cement-augmented group than in the non-augmented group, although the difference was not significant (79.6% vs. 70.0%, p=0.337). Importantly, patients without mechanical failures had significantly higher fusion rates than those with failures (82.5% vs. 56.41%, p=0.0048).Conclusions: Cement-augmented pedicle screws significantly reduce the risk of mechanical failures in thoracolumbar fusion surgery for patients with osteoporosis. Mechanical stability strongly influences fusion success, highlighting the importance of preventing mechanical failure to optimize surgical outcomes. These findings support cement augmentation as an effective strategy to enhance the durability of pedicle screw fixation and should be considered in surgical planning for patients with osteoporosis.

Introduction: Gender-based violence (GBV) is a burden throughout Nepal. This study aims to assess the sociodemographic profile of GBV cases and shed light on factors associated with these incidents in the Jumla district of rural Nepal. Methods: A retrospective observational study involving all the GBV cases brought for clinical medico-legal examination at the Department of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology, Karnali Academy of Health Sciences, Jumla, Nepal, from 1st January 2022–31st December 2023. The study variables included various socio-demographic profiles of these cases. These variables were entered and analyzed using Microsoft Excel (version 16.16.27-- 201012) and SPSS 23.0. Results: Among the total clinical forensic medicine cases, GBV was present in 83 (41.92%). All the females were survivors, 53 (63.85%), and all the males were perpetrators, 30 (36.14%). The median ages of the females and males were 20 years (Range: 11–73) and 19 years (Range: 13–52), respectively. Among these cases, 20 (24.10%) were associated with physical assault, and 63 (75.90%) were related to sexual assault, with all male examinees presenting with sexual assault. Conclusion: GBV is common among females in Jumla and is primarily inflicted by males due to various sociocultural factors.

การวิจัยเรื่องนี้มีวัตถุประสงค์เพื่อ (1) พัฒนาผลสัมฤทธิ์ทางการเรียน เรื่อง พฤติกรรมทางเพศของวัยรุ่น โดยการจัดการเรียนรู้แบบใช้ปัญหาเป็นฐานของนักเรียน ชั้นประถมศึกษาปีที่ 6 ให้เป็นไปตามเกณฑ์ที่กำหนดร้อยละ 80 (2) ศึกษาความก้าวหน้าทางการเรียน เรื่อง พฤติกรรมทางเพศของวัยรุ่น โดยการจัดการเรียนรู้แบบใช้ปัญหาเป็นฐาน ของนักเรียนชั้นประถมศึกษาปีที่ 6 (3) ศึกษาความพึงพอใจต่อการจัดการเรียนรู้ เรื่อง พฤติกรรมทางเพศของวัยรุ่น โดยการจัดการเรียนรู้แบบใช้ปัญหาเป็นฐานของนักเรียน ชั้นประถมศึกษาปีที่ 6 การวิจัยนี้เป็นการวิจัยแบบกึ่งทดลอง กลุ่มตัวอย่างที่ใช้ในการวิจัย คือนักเรียนชั้นประถมศึกษาปีที่ 6 โรงเรียนวัดราชสิงขร ห้อง ป.6/1 ภาคเรียนที่ 2 ปีการศึกษา 2566 จำนวน 32 คน ได้มาโดยวิธีการสุ่มแบบอย่างง่าย เครื่องมือที่ใช้ในการวิจัยประกอบด้วย (1) ชุดเนื้อหาสาระและกิจกรรมการเรียนรู้ เรื่อง พฤติกรรมทางเพศของวัยรุ่น โดยใช้ปัญหาเป็นฐาน (2) แผนการจัดการเรียนรู้ เรื่องพฤติกรรมทางเพศของวัยรุ่น โดยใช้ปัญหาเป็นฐาน (3) แบบทดสอบวัดผลสัมฤทธิ์ทางการเรียน เรื่องพฤติกรรมทางเพศของวัยรุ่นและ (4) แบบสอบถามความพึงพอใจต่อการจัดการเรียนรู้โดยใช้ปัญหาเป็นฐาน สถิติที่ใช้ในการวิเคราะห์ข้อมูลได้แก่ ค่าร้อยละ ค่าเฉลี่ย และค่าส่วนเบี่ยงเบนมาตรฐาน ผลการวิจัยพบว่า (1) ผลการพัฒนาผลสัมฤทธิ์ทางการเรียน เรื่อง พฤติกรรมทางเพศของวัยรุ่น โดยการจัดการเรียนรู้แบบใช้ปัญหาเป็นฐาน ของนักเรียนชั้นประถมศึกษา ปีที่ 6 โรงเรียนวัดราชสิงขร มีผลสัมฤทธิ์ ทางการเรียน เป็นไปตามเกณฑ์ที่กำหนดร้อยละ 80 (2) ความก้าวหน้าทางการเรียน เรื่อง พฤติกรรมทางเพศของวัยรุ่น โดยการจัดการเรียนรู้แบบใช้ปัญหาเป็นฐาน ของนักเรียนชั้นประถมศึกษาปีที่ 6 มีค่าความก้าวหน้า อยู่ในระดับสูง คิดเป็นร้อยละ 77 เป็นไปตามเกณฑ์ที่กำหนดมากกว่าร้อยละ 50 (3) ความพึงพอใจต่อการจัดการเรียนรู้ เรื่องพฤติกรรมทางเพศของวัยรุ่น โดยการจัดการเรียนรู้แบบใช้ปัญหาเป็นฐาน ของนักเรียนชั้นประถมศึกษาปีที่ 6 โดยภาพรวมอยู่ในระดับมาก ( = 4.28 , S.D. = 0.67)

Background: Childhood undernutrition and overnutrition continue to be major public health challenges in South Africa. There is limited evidence on how socio-economic factors and dietary behaviors influence nutritional outcomes among school-aged children, particularly in rural areas such as Thulamela Municipality. Objective: This study aimed to examine the socio-demographic determinants, dietary patterns, and nutritional status among school-aged children in Thulamela Municipality, Limpopo Province, South Africa. Methods: A cross-sectional survey was conducted with 347 children aged 8–12 years. Simple random sampling was used to select eight villages from a total of 227 within the municipality. A snowball sampling method was used to recruit eligible children. Data on socio-demographic characteristics, including the child’s sex, parental education level, marital status, and employment status, were collected. Additionally, their dietary habits and meal frequency patterns were collected using structured questionnaires. Anthropometric measurements including height, weight, and BMI-for-age were obtained following WHO growth standards. Associations between variables were assessed using chi-square tests, with p-values &lt; 0.05 considered statistically significant. Results: The prevalence of severe and moderate stunting was 20.5% and 21.0%, respectively. Overweight conditions and obesity affected 32.6% and 16.2% of participants, respectively. Parental education (p = 0.027), marital status (p = 0.001), and household income (p = 0.043) showed significant associations with height-for-age and BMI-for-age Z-scores. Additionally, regular breakfast consumption and the frequent intake of vegetables and dairy products were positively associated with improved nutritional outcomes (p &lt; 0.05). Conclusions: The nutritional profile of school-aged children in Thulamela Municipality reflects a double burden of malnutrition, with concurrent high rates of stunting, overweight conditions, and obesity. Interventions that promote balanced diets and address socio-economic disparities are crucial for improving child growth and overall health. Socio-economic factors, including parental education, marital status, and household income, were significantly associated with children’s height-for-age and BMI-for-age. Furthermore, the regular consumption of breakfast, vegetables, and dairy products was associated with better nutritional outcomes, highlighting the influence of both dietary behaviors and socio-demographic determinants on child growth and health. Implementing nutrition education programs within schools that emphasize the value of balanced diets and highlighting the significance of eating breakfast regularly and incorporating vegetables and dairy products into daily meals is important. These programs should include both children and their caregivers to support regular healthy eating behaviors at home and in school. Additionally, schools should carry out regular growth monitoring and nutritional assessments to identify early indications of undernutrition or overnutrition, enabling prompt referrals and interventions for children who may be at risk.

Exercise is an effective lifestyle intervention for managing diabetes. It improves body composition, muscle strength, insulin sensitivity, and glycated hemoglobin levels. However, fluctuations in blood glucose during exercise can discourage participation among individuals with diabetes. The direction and extent of these changes depend on pre-exercise glucose levels, insulin dosage, medications, and exercise type, intensity, and duration. Aerobic exercise lowers glucose by enhancing insulin sensitivity for up to 72 hours post-activity, whereas resistance training may reduce the risk of exercise-induced hypoglycemia. During resistance exercise, catecholamines (epinephrine and norepinephrine) are released, stimulating hepatic glucose production, inhibiting peripheral glucose uptake, and increasing lactate formation through anaerobic glycolysis. Consequently, blood glucose may decrease only slightly or even rise transiently during and after exercise recovery. Resistance training enhances glucose regulation by promoting GLUT4 translocation and increasing muscle mass, leading to improved insulin sensitivity, reduced adiposity, and greater muscular strength. Individualized resistance training with proper glycemic monitoring is therefore an essential component of optimal diabetes management.

Đặt vấn đề: Bệnh thận do thuốc cản quang (CIN) là một biến chứng hay gặp do thuốc cản quang gây ra. Đặc biệt trên bệnh nhân có bệnh thận mạn (CKD), nguy cơ do thuốc còn cao hơn nữa, gây các biến cố trước mắt và lâu dài cho người bệnh. Tuy nhiên trên những bệnh nhân có bệnh thận mạn chưa điều trị thay thế thường không được theo dõi đầy đủ và lâu dài sau sử dụng thuốc cản quang. Nghiên cứu này nhằm đánh giá tổn thương thận ở người bệnh có bệnh thận mạn chưa điều trị thay thế, sau chụp và/hoặc can thiệp động mạch vành qua da ở Bệnh viện Bạch Mai. Đối tượng và phương pháp nghiên cứu: Nghiên cứu mô tả cắt ngang trên 110 người bệnh CKD chưa điều trị thay thế được chụp và/hoặc can thiệp động mạch vành qua da tại bệnh viện Bạch Mai từ tháng 8/2024 – 7/2025. Kết quả: 18,2% bệnh nhân có CIN, trong đó tỉ lệ bệnh nhân CIN phải lọc máu chiếm 15% so với tổng số có CIN. Tỉ lệ CIN tăng dần theo giai đoạn CKD, cao nhất ở nhóm CKD5. Ngoài giảm mức lọc cầu thận trước can thiệp thì việc có sử dụng vận mạch hay giảm thể tích nước tiểu trước và sau can thiệp đều làm tăng tỉ lệ bệnh nhân bị CIN. Kết luận: Bệnh thận mạn làm tăng nguy cơ mắc CIN sau chụp và/hoặc can thiệp động mạch vành qua da

Los aneurismas de la vena safena magna (AVSM) son infrecuentes y representan un desafío diagnóstico, ya que a menudo se los confunde con otras masas en la región inguinal. Su prevalencia es baja y existe un riesgo potencial de complicaciones graves como la trombosis local y el tromboembolismo pulmonar, por lo que su detección y manejo correcto son cruciales. En este artículo se presenta una serie de tres casos de AVSM en pacientes con síndrome de insuficiencia venosa crónica diagnosticados mediante ecografía Doppler color. En todos los casos, se optó por un manejo quirúrgico proactivo, con resultados posoperatorios favorables. Este trabajo subraya la importancia de incluir los AVSM en el diagnóstico diferencial, teniendo en cuenta que la detección temprana y un tratamiento quirúrgico definitivo son la estrategia de elección para mitigar el riesgo de complicaciones y garantizar un pronóstico favorable a largo plazo.

These findings demonstrate dysregulated molecular pathways in cardiomyocytes following exposure to untreated HIV serum versus ART-treated HIV serum from patients followed longitudinally. Altogether, these data suggest that HIV infection and ART contribute to changes seen in the cardiomyocyte phenotype and play complementary roles in the pathogenesis of diastolic dysfunction and HFpEF in PLWH.

Background: Candidemia is a leading cause of invasive fungal infections, with an increased incidence of non-Candida species and resistance. However, pediatric epidemiologic data remain limited. Methods: Multicenter retrospective study analyzing epidemiologic and clinical variables in neonates and children (≤14 years) with candidemia identified by positive blood cultures across 6 tertiary hospitals in southern Spain (2010–2020). Results: A total of 286 cases were identified. Sixty-one percent of patients were admitted to intensive care units. The incidence rates in the neonatal and pediatric intensive care units were 3.2/1000 and 2.5/1000 admissions, respectively. Prematurity was the most common underlying condition (29.4%), followed by onco-hematologic conditions (20.6%) and congenital heart diseases (15%), with 81% of them infected during the perioperative cardiac surgery. Candida parapsilosis was the most prevalent species (46.5%), with fluconazole resistance &lt;1% but echinocandin resistance 8.4-28.6%. Candida albicans (33.6%) remained highly susceptible to all antifungals. Ninety-five percent of the Candida species were susceptible to fluconazole. Empirical treatment included liposomal amphotericin B (57.6%), fluconazole (30.3%) and echinocandins (7.4%), and targeted therapy with fluconazole was prescribed in only 30% of the cases. Recurrence occurred in 17.2% of cases, more frequently with C. parapsilosis ( P = 0.025), parenteral nutrition ( P = 0.004) and congenital heart disease ( P &lt; 0.001). Mortality was 22.3%, associated with recurrent candidemia ( P = 0.009), thrombocytopenia ( P = 0.037) and absence of antifungal prophylaxis ( P = 0.035). Conclusions: High incidence of C. parapsilosis with the greatest recurrence risk was observed in Southern Spain, with a high overall mortality. Low fluconazole resistance supports the need to optimize targeted therapy and enhance the importance of antimicrobial stewardship programs.

Abstract High‐titer glutamic acid decarboxylase 65 (GAD65) antibodies (&gt;20 nmol/L) are linked to chronic focal epilepsy, usually of temporal regional onset. Identification of these antibodies has treatment and prognostic implications. We compared patients with drug‐resistant epilepsy and high‐titer GAD65 antibodies to an age‐ and sex‐matched control group with drug‐resistant GAD65 antibody–negative temporal lobe epilepsy. From 1432 patients presented at a single‐center surgical epilepsy conference (2007–2024), we identified 15 patients (1% from surgical epilepsy conference: 13 female, 86.7%) with high‐titer serum GAD65 antibodies (median serum titer = 960 nmol/L; range 34–4678). The median age at epilepsy onset was 25 years (range 4–44). All had temporal regional‐onset epilepsy; 53% had bitemporal seizures. Three patients had limbic encephalitis, and three developed mesial temporal sclerosis. Those with GAD65 antibody–associated epilepsy were more likely to have depression and/or anxiety and less likely to undergo resection after evaluation than those in the control group. Although seizure types, electroencephalography (EEG), imaging, and autoimmune history were not statistically significantly different from the control group, we found that musicogenic seizures, limbic encephalitis, and type 1 diabetes occurred only in GAD65‐positive patients. These features, when present, may suggest an autoimmune etiology and warrant antibody testing. Identifying patients with GAD65 antibody–associated epilepsy is important due to its drug resistance, lower rate of satisfactory surgical outcomes, and potential responsiveness to immunotherapy. Further research is needed to define the optimal treatment and distinguish this subgroup from other causes of drug‐resistant epilepsy.

Öz Amaç: Bu araştırma, çocuk yoğun bakım ünitesinde çalışan hemşirelerin psikososyal bakım yetkinliği ile yaşam sonu bakım tutumu ve davranışları arasındaki ilişkiyi belirlemek amacıyla yapıldı. Gereç ve Yöntem: Tanımlayıcı ve kesitsel türdeki araştırmanın örneklemini 191 hemşire oluşturdu. Veriler, “Bilgi Formu” ve “Psikososyal Bakım Yetkinliği Öz Değerlendirme Ölçeği” ve “Yoğun Bakım Hemşirelerinin Yaşam Sonu Bakıma Yönelik Tutum ve Davranışları Ölçeği” kullanılarak Google form aracılığı ile toplandı. Verilerin değerlendirilmesinde standart sapma, ortalama, minimum, maksimum, bağımsız gruplarda t-testi, tek yönlü varyans analizi (ANOVA) ve pearson korelasyon analizi kullanıldı. Bulgular: Çalışmaya katılan hemşirelerin %80,6’sının kadın, %89,0’nun lisans mezunu ve yaş ortalamasının 31,95±6,81 olduğu belirlendi. Çocuk yoğun bakım ünitesinde çalışma yılı ortalamasının 5,29±4,38 ve nöbette bakılan hasta ortalamasının üç olduğu saptandı. Katılımcıların yoğun bakım hemşireliğinden memnun olma ve çalışmayı isteme durumu ile psikososyal bakım yetkinliği öz değerlendirme toplam puan ve tüm alt boyut puan ortalaması arasında istatistiksel olarak anlamlı ilişki olduğu saptandı (p

The routine application of pharmacogenomic insights in clinical settings marks a transformative shift toward individualized patient care and precision medicine. Genotype-guided dosing has demonstrated clinical benefits in optimizing the safety and efficacy of several medications, including warfarin, clopidogrel, and thiopurines 1,2. Despite the availability of well-established guidelines and robust scientific backing from entities such as the Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementation Consortium (CPIC) and the Dutch Pharmacogenetics Working Group (DPWG), the integration of pharmacogenomics into routine clinical practice remains limited. One major barrier is the lack of awareness and training among healthcare professionals. Studies show that many clinicians lack confidence in interpreting and applying pharmacogenomic data 3, which limits its utility at the point of care.

La atención espiritual en el paciente al final de la vida constituye un componente esencial de los cuidados paliativos, pues aborda la dimensión trascendente del ser humano que trasciende la biología y se vincula con el sentido, la dignidad y la reconciliación. Este trabajo analiza la atención espiritual desde la perspectiva de la bioética personalista, que reconoce a la persona como unidad de cuerpo, mente y espíritu, portadora de una dignidad intrínseca e inalienable. El estudio revisa la evolución conceptual de la espiritualidad en la práctica paliativa, la respuesta institucional y profesional ante las necesidades espirituales, y la fundamentación bioética que orienta la intervención enfermera en este contexto. Mediante una metodología de revisión bibliográfica y análisis documental, se examinaron fuentes científicas y filosóficas relacionadas con la espiritualidad, la bioética personalista y los cuidados paliativos. Los resultados evidencian que el sufrimiento espiritual es tan relevante como el físico y psicológico, y que su atención repercute directamente en la calidad de vida, el afrontamiento y la aceptación del proceso de morir. La enfermería, desde una visión integral, tiene la responsabilidad ética de cuidar también la dimensión espiritual, mediante la escucha activa, la empatía y la presencia compasiva. Se puede concluir que los diferentes autores estudiados coinciden en que la atención espiritual, fundamentada en la bioética personalista, favorece un cuidado verdaderamente humanizado y respeta la dignidad del paciente hasta el final. Se recomienda fortalecer la formación en competencias espirituales, incluir esta dimensión en los protocolos asistenciales y promover la investigación aplicada en este ámbito.

Abstract Background Artificial intelligence (AI) is rapidly changing both clinical psychiatry and the education of medical professionals. However, little is currently known about how AI is being discussed in the education and training of psychiatry for medical students and doctors around the world. Objective This paper aims to provide a snapshot of the available data on this subject as of 2024. A deliberately broad definition of AI was adopted to capture the widest range of relevant literature and applications, including machine learning, natural language processing, and generative AI tools. Methods A scoping review was conducted using both peer-reviewed publications from PubMed, Embase, PsycINFO, and Scopus databases, and gray literature sources. The criterion for inclusion was a description of how AI could be applied to education or training in psychiatry. Results A total of 26 records published between 2016 and 2024 were included. The key themes identified were (1) the imperative for an AI curriculum for students or doctors training in psychiatry, (2) uses of AI to develop educational resources, (3) uses of AI to develop clinical skills, (4) uses of AI for assessments, (5) academic integrity or ethical considerations surrounding the use of AI, and (6) tensions relating to competing priorities and directions. Conclusions Although a nascent field, it is clear that AI will increasingly impact assessment, clinical skills training, and the development of teaching resources in psychiatry. Training curricula will need to reflect the new knowledge and skills required for future clinical practice. Educators will need to be mindful of academic integrity risks and to emphasize development of critical thinking skills. Attitudes of psychiatrists toward the rise of AI in training remain underexplored.

Background/Objectives: Ineffective erythropoiesis (IE) is a hallmark of β-thalassemia and contributes to major clinical complications, including severe anemia, extramedullary hematopoiesis, and progressive iron overload. Despite its central role in disease pathophysiology, there is no established biomarker for the reliable identification and monitoring of IE. This systematic review was conducted to evaluate potential serum markers that reflect IE in β-thalassemia. Methods: Across seven databases (PubMed, ScienceDirect, Web of Science, SpringerLink, Taylor &amp; Francis, ProQuest, and SAGE), thirteen studies met the eligibility criteria and were analyzed to identify circulating biomarkers associated with IE in β-thalassemia. Results: The most consistently reported markers were growth differentiation factor-15 (GDF-15), soluble transferrin receptor (sTfR), erythropoietin (EPO), and erythroferrone (ERFE), all of which demonstrated strong correlations with the degree of IE and erythroid expansion. Additional markers, including circulating cell-free DNA (cfDNA), CA15.3, hepcidin, ferritin, and phosphatidylserine (PS)-exposed red blood cells, were also found to be elevated, reflecting increased erythroid turnover, apoptosis, and secondary iron dysregulation. These findings suggest that while individual markers capture different aspects of IE, their combined evaluation may provide a more comprehensive picture of disease burden. Conclusions: IE represents the central pathophysiological driver of β-thalassemia and is closely linked to disease complications. Early detection through circulating biomarkers offers the potential for timely identification of high-risk patients, monitoring of therapeutic responses, and prognostication. Although current evidence highlights GDF-15, sTfR, ERFE, and EPO as the most promising candidates, further validation in larger, longitudinal cohorts is required before clinical implementation.

Fever is among the leading causes of emergency department visits during childhood. Mother’s knowledge, attitude, and approach are crucial for effective management. This descriptive study aims to determine the knowledge, attitudes, and approaches of mothers with 0-6 aged children. Data were collected through face-to-face interviews (n=377) at XXX Hospital via Personal Information Form, the Parent Fever Management Scale (PFMS), and the Fever Management Approach tool (FMA). Data were analyzed using SPSS 25.0. Mean age was 29.62±5.80; a significant portion (26.8%) were primary school graduates, motherhood with 23.48 ± 4.66, and 2.06± 1.07 children. Mean PFMS was 34.40±5.0, FMA score 22.52±4.85. 64.7% showed “functional approach” in fever management. Mothers age, education, motherhood age showed similarity across PFMS and FMA groups (p&gt;0.05), while mean PFMS scores differed based on FMA groups (p

Vitamin C is a small water-soluble molecule primarily cleared by the kidneys. Therefore, its plasma concentration would be expected to increase as kidney function declines. However, studies in patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) and kidney transplant recipients have shown the opposite: a positive correlation between kidney function and plasma vitamin C levels. In this review, we discuss potential explanations for this counterintuitive finding and suggest alternative mechanisms influencing vitamin C bioavailability in this population. We also explore the hypothesis that this phenomenon may be linked to benzoic acid (benzoate) exposure. Benzoic acid is a widely used food preservative that, like vitamin C, is water-soluble and renally excreted. In individuals with impaired kidney function, reduced clearance may lead to elevated circulating benzoic acid levels, which could increase the likelihood of an in vivo chemical reaction between benzoic acid and vitamin C, resulting in the formation of benzene, which is a known toxic and carcinogenic compound. We summarize experimental evidence demonstrating the vitamin C–benzoic acid reaction in vitro, along with preliminary animal studies suggesting it may also occur in vivo. We also discuss the potential clinical consequences of benzene exposure in the context of patients with kidney function impairment. Given the widespread use of benzoic acid as a food preservative and the ongoing discussion around vitamin C supplementation in patients with kidney disease, this review invites further investigation to evaluate whether this reaction represents a health hazard for this population.

Paracoccidioidomycosis (PCM) is a systemic fungal infection that primarily affects the lungs. Previous studies have shown that 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), a chemotherapeutic agent, reduces pulmonary myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), thereby stimulating immune responses in PCM. This study aimed to evaluate the efficacy of the combined 5-FU and AmB therapy in a murine model of PCM. C57BL/6 mice were infected with <i>Paracoccidioides brasiliensis</i> and treated with AmB and/or 5-FU. We found that the 5-FU and AmB combination therapy led to improved disease control, as evidenced by reduced fungal burden, decreased tissue damage, and an increased survival rate. Moreover, the combined treatment was associated with decreased lymphocyte and neutrophil counts, along with an increased number of macrophages in pulmonary tissue, suggesting a controlled infectious process without hyperinflammatory reactions. These findings support the potential of combining 5-FU with conventional antifungal therapy as a promising strategy for enhancing PCM treatment outcomes.

Objective: The prognostic efficiencies of GRIm and HCC-GRIm scores in HCC have been determined in previous studies. However, there is no study evaluating them according to etiological subtypes in the literature yet. The aim of this study was to investigate the prognostic efficacy of GRIm (Gustave Roussy immune score) and HCC-GRIm score in HCC etiological subgroups. Methodology: The study was conducted on patients aged 18 years and older with unresectable/metastatic hepatocellular cancer (HCC) diagnosed between 2017 and 2023. GRIm and HCC-GRIm scores was calculated. The prognostic efficiencies of these scores were evaluated. Results: Sixty-seven (54%) of the patients had low GRIm scores, while 68(54.8%) had low HCC-GRIm scores. Median overall survival (OS) was 17.2 months in patients with low-viral GRIm scores, while median OS was 2.1 months in patients with high-viral GRIm scores. Median OS was 12.6 months in patients with low-nonviral GRIm scores. Median OS was 3.3 months in patients with high-nonviral GRIm scores (HR: 2.4(%95 CI 1.3-4.7) p

Trimester III adalah salah satu periode kehamilan yang memerlukan perhatian khusus. Keluhan atas ketidaknyamanan ibu pada kehamilan Trimester III menyebabkan ibu mengalami insomnia (susah tidur), sehingga menyebabkan kualitas tidur ibu menurun. Kualitas tidur ibu diukur menggunakan lembar kuisioner PSQI. Salah satu penatalaksanaan yang dapat dilakukan untuk mengatasi hal tersebut adalah dengan melakukan tehnik Massage Effelurage. Tujuan dari penelitian ini adalah untuk mengetahui Pengaruh Massage Effleurage Terhadap Peningkatan Kualitas Tidur Pada Ibu Hamil Trimester III di Rumah Sakit Bhayangkara Denpasar Design Penelitian ini adalah Pre-Eksperimental melalui One Group Pretest-Postest Design. Jumlah sampel sebanyak 30 orang ibu hamil trimester ke III dengan teknik pengambilan sampel Non-Probability Sampling , jenis Purposive Sampling. Data dianalisis dengan menggunakan Uji Wilcoxon untuk mengetahui kualitas tidur ibu sebelum dan sesudah dilakukan intervensi, Setelah pemberian intervensi berupa massage effleurage, semua responden menunjukkan peningkatan menjadi kualitas tidur cukup (100,0%). Berdasarkan hasil dari perhitungan wilcoxon, didapat p value sebesar 0,000&lt; 0,05, maka pada taraf kepercayaan 95%, Ha diterima, artinya Ada Pengaruh Massage Effleurage Terhadap Peningkatan Kualitas Tidur Pada Ibu Hamil Trimester III di Rumah Sakit Bhayangkara.

Mục tiêu: Mô tả đặc điểm dịch tễ học ngộ độc cấp ở trẻ em tại Bệnh viện Đa khoa Tiền Giang. Phương pháp: Thiết kế nghiên cứu hồi cứu mô tả loạt ca có phân tích trên 267 trẻ em dưới 16 tuổi được chẩn đoán ngộ độc cấp nhập viện tại Bệnh viện Đa khoa Tiền Giang từ tháng 01 năm 2022 đến tháng 12 năm 2024. Kết quả: Trẻ nữ chiếm 55,8% và trẻ nam 44,2%. Trẻ em trong độ tuổi từ 1 đến dưới 3 tuổi chiếm tỷ lệ cao nhất (31,5%); nhóm tuổi từ 7 đến dưới 12 tuổi (25,1%); 3 đến dưới 6 tuổi (21,3%); trẻ trên 12 tuổi chiếm 18% và trẻ dưới 1 tuổi 4,1%. 77,2% trẻ cư trú ở khu vực nông thôn, 22,8% ở khu vực thành thị. Độc tố sinh học (nọc rắn), với chiếm tỷ lệ 70,4%; hóa chất (15,4%); thuốc tân dược (7,5%) và ngộ độc thực phẩm với 16 trường hợp (6,0%); ít gặp nhất là phân su (0,7%). Đường qua da và niêm mạc chiếm tỷ lệ cao nhất (70,4%), tiêu hóa (28,9%) và đường hô hấp (0,7%). Ngộ độc xảy ra chủ yếu tại nhà (92,6%), ngộ độc tại trường học đứng thứ hai (6,7%) và 0,7% trường hợp ngộ độc xảy ra trong bụng mẹ.

I read with great interest the article by Sharma et al, investigating static and dynamic visual acuity (SVA and DVA) among professional bus drivers in the Tricity region of India.1 The study adds valuable insight into occupational vision health, yet some gaps and methodological limitations merit discussion. First, while the cross-sectional design provides a snapshot of visual skills, it does not establish causal relationships between visual functions and driving performance. A longitudinal or interventional design could more effectively assess whether deficits in DVA or contrast sensitivity directly contribute to increased accident risk, as highlighted in previous systematic reviews linking vision impairment with crash likelihood

hs-TnT: high sensitivity Troponin T; STEMI: ST-elevation myocardial infarction.

Adolescents, defined as individuals aged 10–19 years, represent a vital population segment undergoing rapid physical,psychological, and social transformations. This period of transition offers significant opportunities for growth butalso presents multifaceted health and safety challenges. Globally, over 1.2 million adolescents die annually fromlargely preventable causes including accidents, violence, and reproductive health complications. This comprehensivereview examines the diverse dimensions of adolescent health and safety, covering physical health, mental well-being,sexual and reproductive health, substance use, violence, and injury prevention. It highlights the influence of socialdeterminants and emerging threats such as digital risks and climate change. The roles of families, communities, healthsystems, and policy frameworks are discussed as crucial enablers for promoting adolescent health. The article furtheridentifies key challenges such as limited access to adolescent-friendly services, stigma, mental health neglect, andinequities. Future directions emphasize strengthening health systems, expanding mental health support, enhancinghealth education, empowering youth participation, improving data collection, and fostering multisectoral collaboration.Addressing adolescent health through a holistic, inclusive, and evidence-based approach is essential for securing thewell-being of this generation and ensuring sustainable societal development.

Meme kanseri, dünya genelinde kadınlarda en sık görülen kanser türü olup önemli bir halk sağlığı sorunu olarak varlığını sürdürmektedir. Hastalığın insidans ve mortalite oranlarındaki artış, erken tanı ve tarama programlarının etkin biçimde uygulanmasının gerekliliğini ortaya koymaktadır. Meme kanserinde erken tanı; kendi kendine meme muayenesi (KKMM), klinik meme muayenesi ve mamografi gibi yöntemlerle mümkün olmakta; bu yöntemlerin düzenli ve doğru uygulanması sağkalımı artırmakta ve tedavi başarısını olumlu yönde etkilemektedir. Birinci basamak sağlık hizmetlerinde görev yapan ebeler, kadınlarla sürekli ve doğrudan temas hâlinde olmaları nedeniyle meme kanserine yönelik farkındalığın artırılması, erken tanı davranışlarının kazandırılması ve tarama programlarına katılımın teşvik edilmesinde kritik bir role sahiptir. Bu kitap bölümünde, ebelerin meme kanseri ve KKMM konusundaki bilgi, tutum ve uygulamaları güncel literatür ışığında ele alınmıştır. İncelenen çalışmalar, ebelerin ve ebelik öğrencilerinin meme kanseri hakkında belirli bir bilgi düzeyine sahip olduklarını; ancak bu bilginin her zaman düzenli ve sürdürülebilir bir davranışa dönüşmediğini göstermektedir. Özellikle öz-yeterlilik algısı, algılanan duyarlılık, motivasyon ve sağlık inançları gibi psikososyal faktörlerin KKMM uygulama davranışı üzerinde belirleyici olduğu görülmektedir. Ayrıca, ebelik öğrencilerinin mesleki kimlik gelişimi sürecinde kazandıkları sağlık davranışlarının mezuniyet sonrası bakım uygulamalarına ve toplum eğitimlerine yansıyabileceği vurgulanmaktadır. Sonuç olarak, ebelerde ve ebelik öğrencilerinde KKMM uygulama davranışlarını artırmaya yönelik girişimlerin yalnızca bilgi aktarımına odaklanmaması; tutum ve davranış değişikliğini destekleyen, öz-yeterliliği güçlendiren ve uygulamalı eğitim yaklaşımlarını içeren programlar şeklinde planlanması gerektiği değerlendirilmektedir. Bu yaklaşımın, toplum temelli erken tanı davranışlarının yaygınlaştırılmasına ve meme kanserine bağlı mortalitenin azaltılmasına katkı sağlayacağı düşünülmektedir.

ABSTRACT Among 452 adult patients with Gram-negative bacteremia from a urinary tract infection source who received oral step-down therapy with highly bioavailable oral beta-lactam, we observed no difference in 60-day recurrence in patients treated with higher consensus-recommended dosing compared to lower, standard dosing (odds ratio = 0.76 [95% confidence interval = 0.43–1.32]), although the directionality of the effect was favorable. The study was limited by inadequate sample size and confounding. Randomized or large observational comparative effectiveness studies are needed. IMPORTANCE Definitive treatment of Gram-negative bacteremia with oral antibiotic agents is not one size fits all. Use of oral fluoroquinolones and sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim is evidence-based but carries risk for adverse events. Data supporting the use of oral beta-lactams are mixed, likely in part due to variable agent selection and dosing. This analysis shows that higher, consensus-recommended dosing of highly bioavailable beta-lactam antibiotics was not significantly different from patients treated with lower dosing on 60-day recurrence. Our study was limited by the number of patients with discrete MICs and overinfluence of complicated urinary tract infection on outcomes.

Bu çalışmanın amacı 3 İdiot filmini Michel de Certeau ve James C. Scott’un mikro direniş teorileri çerçevesinde analiz ederek bireyin kendisine uygulanan herhangi bir otoriteye karşı asla tepkisiz kalmadığı ve sessiz kaldığında bile aslında aktif bir tutum gösterdiğini ortaya koymaktır. Bu amaçla 3 İdiot filminde geçen bazı sahneler üzerinden öğrenci ve akademisyenler arasındaki iktidar ilişkisinde sessiz taraf olan öğrencilerin aslında hiç de tepkisiz ve pasif birey olmadıklarını ve tepkilerini farklı biçimlerde dile getirdikleri ileri sürülecektir. Çalışma ile filmde eğitim sistemi içindeki otoritelere karşı öğrencilerin doğrudan çatışma yerine gündelik yaşam pratikleri içinde gerçekleştirdikleri direnme biçimleri, betimsel analiz yöntemi kullanılarak incelemiştir. Ele alınan filmde ana karakterler ve kilit sahneler üzerinden, öğrencilerin mevcut öğretim sistemine ve akademisyenlere gösterdikleri birtakım eylemler, direniş perspektifinden ele alınmıştır. Çalışmanın sonunda öğrencilerin onaylamadıkları öğretim sistemine uyum sağlamış görüntüsü verdikleri ve bu durumun hem sistemin içini boşalttığı ve hem de uzun vadede öğrencilere zarar verdiği değerlendirilmiştir. Bu teorik bir çalışma olduğundan etik kurul onayı gerektirmemektedir.

Bu çalışma, İstanbul ili Üsküdar ilçesi Bahçelievler Mahallesi’nde yer alan bir kentsel dönüşüm projesinde gerçekleştirilen ankrajlı fore kazık sisteminde ankraj kesme işlemine ait analizleri ve saha performansını incelemektedir. Proje kapsamında 16–18 metre aralığında derin kazı yapılmış olup yapı zeminine aktarılan toplam gerilme yaklaşık 45 kPa’dır. İnceleme alanındaki zemin profili, orta (W3) ile ileri (W4) derecede ayrışmış kumtaşı–kiltaşı birimlerinden oluşmakta ve belirgin bir ayrışma etkisi sergilemektedir. Kazı stabilitesinin sağlanması amacıyla, 22 adet 65 cm çapında ve 18 m derinliğinde fore kazıklar ile 20° ters eğimli ankrajlardan oluşan bir iksa sistemi tasarlanmış ve kuşak kirişleri aracılığıyla kazıklara entegre edilmiştir. Ankraj kesme sonrası süreçlerde yapılan inklinometre okumaları sayesinde yatay deplasman farkları izlenmiş, elde edilen veriler ile sistemin güvenliği değerlendirilmiştir. Ayrıca, Plaxis 3D yazılımı kullanılarak sonlu elemanlar yöntemiyle sayısal modelleme yapılmış, ankraj kesmenin deplasman davranışları üzerindeki etkisi incelenmiştir. Bulguları, sahada gerçekleştirilen ölçümler ile sonlu elemanlar analizinin %95 oranında uyum gösterdiğini ve ZB sınıfı zeminlerde ankraj kesmenin performans kriterlerini güvenli bir şekilde sağladığını ortaya koymuştur.

Introduction: The Integrated Care for Older People (ICOPE) care model is being actively implemented worldwide, including in low-resource countries like Nepal. We aimed to conduct a survey to understand the major barriers and facilitators of implementing ICOPE in Nepal from a clinical perspective. Methods: A survey questionnaire was developed to assess the barriers and facilitators of implementing ICOPE at the micro, meso, and macro levels and the recommended four steps of ICOPE. Relevant suggestions for improving ICOPE were also collected from the implementors. Results: Among the 11 (ICOPE implementors) respondents, four were geriatricians and seven were non-geriatric clinicians. Lack of suitable infrastructure, shortage of trained workforce, comparatively low priority for geriatric health and geriatrics, lack of national guidelines and funding were considered the major barriers for implementing ICOPE in Nepal. Major facilitators for implementing ICOPE in Nepal were motivated healthcare workers, continuous support from the WHO, and government ICOPE training programs. Lack of a systematic referral framework with no provision of electronic health records and a dedicated team were considered as major barriers in completing the recommended four steps of ICOPE. The respondents thought the ICOPE application was feasible in Nepal, which could also serve as a tool to share health records digitally. Additionally, localisation of the ICOPE pathway was suggested. Conclusion: The ICOPE care pathway was considered quite feasible in Nepal by the implementors, although more work is needed to remove the current barriers and embed ICOPE in the existing healthcare system.

Background: The clinical epidemiology of hypertension (HTN) in rural Thailand has not been fully reported. We describe factors associated with HTN control and cardiovascular (CV) outcomes in rural Thai communities. Methods: We conducted a cross-sectional study in Thai rural areas in 2024 using a multistage sampling scheme. Eligible participants included adults with HTN receiving care from 36 primary care units across four geographical regions. We used multilevel logistic regression modeling to examine factors associated with HTN control. Results: We included 1000 participants (68.3% women; mean age, 64.2 years). The HTN control rate was 63.9%, using a threshold of &lt;140/90 mmHg for defining HTN control. When using optimal blood pressure thresholds (&lt;130/80 mmHg for ages 20–64 years; &lt;140/80 mmHg for ages ≥65 years), the HTN control rate was even lower at 47.8%. Factors associated with uncontrolled HTN included younger age, residence in the southern region, no school attendance, adding extra salt to food, low physical activity levels, and obesity. Prevalence of cardiovascular diseases (CVD) in people with HTN was as follows: stroke (10.3%), ischemic heart disease (1.4%), atrial fibrillation (1.2%), and left ventricular hypertrophy (6.0%). A high or very high 10-year CVD risk (i.e., &gt; 20% risk over 10 years) was predicted in 7.9% of individuals with HTN: 12.7% in males and 5.0% in females. Elevated low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol (≥100 mg/dL) was present in 58.7% of participants; 51.5% had a body mass index of ≥25 kg/m2. Life’s Essential 8 CV health was categorized as poor, moderate, and high for 8.8%, 83.3%, and 7.8% of participants, respectively. Conclusions: We highlight a need for improving HTN control in rural Thailand and have identified sociodemographic, lifestyle, and metabolic factors that are associated with a lack of HTN control. Cardiovascular complications remain a significant concern for this population.

Background Pregnancy in women with Marfan syndrome (MFS) is associated with increased maternal and neonatal risks, yet most existing studies are limited by small sample sizes and short follow-up. This study aimed to evaluate peripartum and long-term maternal outcomes, as well as neonatal outcomes, in MFS pregnancies using nationwide data from Taiwan. Methods This population-based cohort study analysed pregnancies identified from national health databases in Taiwan between 2004 and 2022. Maternal outcomes included severe aortic complications, 42-day and late maternal mortality and long-term cardiovascular events. Neonatal outcomes comprised gestational age, birth weight and neonatal complications. Logistic and Poisson regression models were used to estimate adjusted ORs and incidence rate ratio (IRR). Results Among 3 337 969 pregnancies (2 073 560 women), 794 pregnancies in 500 women with MFS were identified. Compared with non-MFS pregnancies, those with MFS had markedly higher rates of severe aortic complications (1.1% vs 0.0005%) and 42-day maternal mortality (0.1% vs 0.02%). During a mean 10.7-year follow-up, the risks of composite aortic events (IRR 885.4, 95% CI 629.3 to 1245.6) and late maternal mortality (IRR 5.1, 95% CI 3.1 to 8.7) remained significantly elevated. Neonates born to mothers with MFS had lower gestational age and birth weight and higher risks of neonatal complications requiring intensive care. Conclusions MFS pregnancies carry high risks of aortic complications and maternal mortality, persisting into long-term follow-up. Neonatal outcomes are also adversely affected. Early diagnosis, preconception counselling and multidisciplinary, guideline-adherent care are essential to optimise maternal and neonatal safety and long-term outcomes.

Background: Pelvic fractures occur as a result of high-energy trauma in young adults and as a result of fragile falls in older individuals. Understanding the age and sex-specific patterns, context, and causality of emergency department presentations can inform targeted prevention strategies and service planning. Methods: We conducted a retrospective observational study of 1,324 patients presenting to the emergency department with pelvic fractures (ICD-10 codes S32 and T02.1) at a tertiary care center in southeastern Türkiye between April 29, 2017, and April 29, 2022. Demographic characteristics, diagnostic categories, service distribution, and length of hospital stay (LOS) were analyzed. Group differences were assessed using the Pearson χ² test with Cramér’s V and the Mann–Whitney U test with Cliff’s δ, with a two-sided significance level of α = 0.05. Results: Among the study cohort, females accounted for 55.4% (734 of 1,324), a proportion significantly higher than the expected 50% (binomial p &amp;lt; 0.001). The median age was 40 years [IQR: 26–53] in females and 33 years [IQR: 25–47] in males (U = 188,543, p &amp;lt; 0.001). Age group distributions differed significantly by sex (χ²(7) = 30.43, p &amp;lt; 0.001; Cramér’s V = 0.15). Diagnostic profiles also varied by sex across the eight most frequent categories (χ² = 125.47, p &amp;lt; 0.001; V = 0.31), with closed coccyx fractures being the most common overall, highlighting the contribution of low-energy mechanisms. Age differed significantly across provision types (Kruskal–Wallis H = 75.20, p &amp;lt; 0.001). Length of stay was highly zero-inflated, with a median of 0 days in both sexes; however, males had marginally longer hospitalizations (U = 222,006, p = 0.026; δ = 0.03) and a higher proportion of admissions ≥1 day (5.8% vs 3.3%; χ² = 4.28, p = 0.039). Annual case counts were uneven (χ² goodness-of-fit = 230.49, p &amp;lt; 0.001), with a marked decline observed in 2020, coinciding with the COVID-19 pandemic. Conclusions: The epidemiology of pelvic fractures demonstrates distinct age- and sex-specific patterns, characterized by a predominance of low-energy fractures in older women and higher-energy injuries in younger men. Preventive strategies should therefore address both osteoporosis and fragility-related falls in the elderly as well as mechanisms of high-energy trauma in younger populations. Furthermore, the observed reduction in caseloads during the COVID-19 pandemic underscores the need for adaptable trauma care planning that can respond effectively to external disruptions.

İlaçlara erişim, en temel insan haklarından biridir. Ancak bazı sebeplerle ilaçlara erişimde güçlük yaşanmaktadır. Özellikle yakın zamanda tüm dünyayı etkisi altına alan Covid-19 küresel salgınında ortaya çıkan gelişmeler, tüm dünyanın dikkatini bu konuya çekmiştir. Pandeminin yanı sıra yaşanan depremler ve diğer felaketler, ilaç sektörünün stratejik önemini bir kez daha hatırlatmıştır. Salgınla mücadele etmek, kişilerin ve toplumun sağlık hakkını korumak, ilaçlar ve tıbbi cihazlar gibi gerekli ürünlerin bulunabilirliğini sağlamak ve tüm bunlara adil erişimi temin etmek devletlerin sorumlulukları arasındadır. Bu nedenle özellikle patentli ilaçlar, yüksek fiyatlarından dolayı halk tarafından satın alınamaz bir duruma gelirse önemli bir sorun ortaya çıkacaktır. Bu hususta olmak üzere, patent hakkı kapsamında buluş sahiplerini korumak ya da toplumun acil halk sağlığı ihtiyaçlarını karşılamak arasında devletlerin ya bir tercih yapmaları ya da bir denge kurmaları gerekmektedir.

Background: Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) has emerged as the most common chronic liver disorder worldwide and represents the hepatic manifestation of metabolic syndrome. In India, the burden of NAFLD is increasing rapidly due to rising prevalence of obesity, diabetes and sedentary lifestyles. Imaging-based diagnosis is resource-intensive, making surrogate indices useful for large-scale screening. To estimate the prevalence of NAFLD using fatty liver index (FLI) and to identify associated metabolic risk factors among adults attending a tertiary care hospital. Methods: A hospital-based cross-sectional study was conducted at Hitech Medical College and Hospital, Bhubaneswar, over six months. Adults aged ≥30 years were enrolled. Anthropometric measurements and biochemical parameters were recorded. FLI was calculated using body mass index, waist circumference, serum triglycerides and gamma-glutamyl transferase levels. FLI ≥60 was considered diagnostic of NAFLD. Statistical analysis included descriptive statistics and multivariate logistic regression. Results: Among 210 participants, the prevalence of NAFLD was 32.4%. NAFLD was significantly associated with obesity, diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia and hypertension. Obesity and diabetes remained independent predictors on multivariate analysis. Conclusions: Nearly one-third of adults had NAFLD as detected by surrogate indices. FLI is a simple, cost-effective tool that can be used for opportunistic screening in routine clinical practice.

hUC-MSC-derived exosomal miR-149 preserves BSCB integrity and promotes functional recovery after SCI by targeting ET-1 and inhibiting the PI3K/Akt pathway, thereby enhancing junctional protein expression. The miR-149/ET-1 axis may represent a promising therapeutic target for SCI.

Ushbu maqolada o‘rta asr islom falsafasining yirik vakili Ibn Rushdning erkinlik haqidagi qarashlari tahlil qilinadi. Ilmiy ishda Ibn Rushdning inson iroda erkinligi, aql-idrok bilan tanlov qilish imkoniyati va jamiyatdagi erkinlik tushunchalarini uning metafizik, axloqiy va siyosiy qarashlari doirasida ko‘rib chiqilgan. Shuningdek, faylasufning qadariya va jabariya oqimlariga munosabati, falsafa va din o‘rtasidagi muvozanatni saqlashga bo‘lgan yondashuvi, jumladan, Platon falsafasi bilan aloqador siyosiy qarashlari yoritiladi. Maqolada Ibn Rushdning erkinlikni ilohiy qonunlar va aql orqali cheklangan, lekin mas’uliyatli harakatlar orqali amalga oshiriladigan konsepsiya sifatida tushunishi bayon qilinadi. Shu bilan birga, bu qarashlarning zamonaviy axloqiy va siyosiy nazariyalar bilan bog‘liqligi ham ko‘rib chiqiladi.

Successful root canal treatment: It relies on proper access cavity preparation, adequate cleaning, adequate shaping, and complete occlusion. Before these, the location of all canals in the tooth plays a key role in the initial treatment procedures. Among permanent teeth, maxillary and mandibular premolar teeth are reported to be the most diverse teeth in terms of root canal morphology. Maxillary first premolars are the teeth that show the most changes in root anatomy and root canal morphology. Mandibular premolars, which vary widely in terms of root canal morphology, are mostly single canals, but may also have more than one canal. The most common reasons why root canal treatment fails are incomplete canal filling and the presence of an untreated canal. It is especially important to know the root canal anatomy and possible variations for a successful endodontic treatment. The aim of this article is to study four patients; It presents the diagnosis process of a three-canal upper premolar tooth, two two-canal lower premolar teeth and a three-canal lower premolar tooth and the approach followed in root canal treatments.

Biopsy is a fundamental interventional procedure that enables tissue sampling from suspicious lesions for diagnostic purposes. Image-guided biopsies are minimally invasive approaches that increase diagnostic accuracy. Targeted tissue sampling of lesions can be performed with high success rates under the guidance of methods such as ultrasonography, computed tomography, fluoroscopy, or magnetic resonance imaging. Under the guidance of these imaging modalities, safe and controlled sampling with a low risk of complications is possible, especially in lesions involving salivary glands, cortical bone perforation, or soft tissue components. Image guidance offers advantages such as determining the entry path, avoiding surrounding neurovascular structures, assessing lesion vascularity, and providing real-time guidance during the procedure.In dentistry, fine-needle aspiration biopsy and Tru-Cut biopsy are the most commonly used biopsy methods. Fine-needle aspiration biopsy is a minimally invasive method with a low risk of complications, often preferred for fluid-containing or superficial lesions. Obtaining cellular material allows for cytological evaluation, but procedure repetition may be necessary in case of inadequate sampling. Tru-Cut biopsy, on the other hand, allows for obtaining a tissue core with thicker needles and preserves the histological structure and tissue architecture. It has higher diagnostic accuracy in solid or bone lesions, although the risk of complications is somewhat increased compared to fine-needle aspiration biopsy.This review discusses the techniques, procedural steps, advantages and disadvantages, complications, and techniques of fine-needle aspiration biopsy and Tru-Cut biopsy performed under image guidance in dentistry, in light of the literature.

Introduction: Tubal ectopic pregnancies typically rupture in the first trimester. Advanced tubal pregnancies progressing beyond the first trimester are exceptionally rare due to the anatomical constraints of the fallopian tube. Case Presentation: A 28-year-old was brought to the Emergency Department at Dubai hospital with severe abdominal pain. Ultrasound showed massive hemoperitoneum, an empty uterus with a live fetus of parameters corresponding to 16 weeks of gestation in the left side of the pelvis. Emergency laparotomy revealed a large left tubal pregnancy. A left salpingectomy was subsequently performed. The postoperative course was uneventful. Discussion: This case represents one of the most advanced tubal pregnancies reported in literature. The absence of early rupture may be attributed to unusual tubal elasticity or atypical trophoblastic invasion. The case highlights the diagnostic challenges in advanced tubal pregnancies, where initial imaging may be misleading. Conclusion: This rare presentation emphasizes that tubal pregnancy should remain in the differential diagnosis beyond the first trimester. It underscores the importance of comprehensive early prenatal care and detailed ultrasonographic assessment during pregnancy.

Purpose: The zygomaticofacial foramen (ZFF) serves as a critical anatomical landmark in zygomatic implant surgery and facial flap procedures. This study aimed to compare the effectiveness of computed tomography (CT) and cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) in visualizing the ZFF, and to determine which imaging modality provides greater reliability for clinical and surgical planning. Methods: A total of 100 CT and 100 CBCT scans were retrospectively analyzed, providing radiological data from 400 zygomatic bones. The number and location of ZFFs were assessed by 2 independent observers. The relationship between ZFF number and variables such as side, sex, and age was statistically analyzed. Results: Computed tomography and CBCT detected a comparable number of foramina (270 and 267, respectively), with no statistically significant difference between the modalities ( P &gt; 0.05). A significant correlation between right and left sides was observed (r = 0.672, P &lt; 0.001), indicating a tendency for bilateral symmetry. The most common finding was the presence of a single foramen (48%), followed by 2 foramina (31.2%). Females exhibited a significantly greater number of foramina than males ( P = 0.012), whereas age showed no significant correlation. Conclusion: Both CT and CBCT provide comparable accuracy in detecting the ZFF. This finding is clinically significant as it provides an evidence-based rationale for selecting CBCT, a modality with a lower radiation dose and reduced cost, for preoperative evaluation. These results confirm that clinicians can confidently use CBCT for individualized, imaging-based surgical planning to minimize neurovascular complications without sacrificing diagnostic reliability.

Background: A subset of patients with T1-T2 oesophageal cancer are not candidates for surgery or chemotherapy and have a poor prognosis due to limited treatment options. This study evaluated the combination of external beam radiotherapy (EBRT) and endo-oesophageal brachytherapy (EBT) as a curative treatment in these patients, with cause-specific survival (CSS) and local recurrence-free survival (LRFS) as the primary endpoints. Methods: This was a single-centre retrospective analysis of 11 patients with T1-T2 oesophageal cancer treated between 2005 and 2024 with combined EBRT and EBT schedules. Clinical data, treatment schedules, outcomes, and complications were obtained from patient medical records and follow-up documentation. Descriptive statistics and Kaplan–Meier survival analysis were used. Results: The median follow-up was 22 months (2–61 months). CSS rates were 79.5% at 2 years, 66% at 3 years, and 30% at 5 years. LRFS rates were 74.1%, 59%, and 39%, respectively. One severe toxicity (grade ≥ 3) was observed. The most frequent mild toxicities were oesophageal mucositis (18.2%) and ulceration (18.2%). Conclusions: EBT in combination with EBRT seems to be a feasible and well-tolerated treatment with curative intent for inoperable T1-T2 oesophageal cancer patients, offering favourable survival outcomes in a population with limited therapeutic alternatives.

Terbatasnya akses pangan pasca bencana menekankan pentingnya penyediaan pangan darurat yang bergizi dan mudah dikonsumsi bagi seluruh kelompok usia, terutama kelompok rentan ibu hamil. Cookies sebagai pangan darurat potensial diformulasikan dari bahan lokal bergizi tinggi seperti tepung mocaf (Modified Cassava Flour), tepung ikan patin (Pangasius sp.). Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mengetahui pengaruh formulasi tepung mocaf dan tepung ikan patin terhadap kualitas dan nilai gizi Cookies Motin sebagai alternatif pangan darurat bagi ibu hamil. Desain penelitian studi eksperimental RAL satu faktor dengan perlakuan formulasi tepung mocaf dan tepung ikan patin F1 (80%:20%), F2 (70%:30%), dan F3 (55%:45%). Metode penelitian menggunakan uji hedonik untuk mengetahui sifat organoleptik, calculation method untuk mengetahui kandungan energi dan karbohidrat, titrimetri untuk mengetahui kadar protein, gravimetri untuk mengetahui kadar lemak, ICP-OES untuk mengetahui kadar zat besi (Fe), dan spektrofotometer UV-Vis untuk mengetahui nilai aktivitas antioksidan. Hasil penelitian dapat disimpulkan bahwa tidak terdapat perbedaan bermakna pada uji hedonik terhadap aspek warna, aroma, rasa, tekstur dan overall. Cookies dengan formula 55%:45% memiliki penerimaan lebih baik dibandingkan formula lainnya. Nilai gizi Cookies Motin per sajian (50 gram) yaitu energi 218,82 kkal, protein 8,76 gram, lemak 8,81 gram, karbohidrat 26,11 gram, dan zat besi 2,04 mg. Aktivitas antioksidan IC50 Cookies Motin sebesar 1325,79 mg/L dikategorikan sebagai antioksidan sangat lemah. Perlu dilakukan penelitian lebih lanjut terkait intervensi pemberian Cookies Motin sebagai alternatif pangan darurat bagi ibu hamil.

2025 is gone, bringing with it another opportunity to share some highlights from a warehouse worker's swing at studying our living history a sheaf of genome graphs and shelves full of protein-forms at a time.

Metastasis in the axillary lymph nodes (ALNs) occurs in 30-50% of breast cancers (BCs), where residing immune cells play a crucial role in disease progression. Specifically at diagnosis, the immune elements infiltrating the primary tumour are among the best-established prognostic factors. However, their prognostic value in the metastatic ALNs (ALNs+) is poorly understood. We aim to retrospectively assess the immune populations of ALNs+ in luminal A (LA) and triple-negative BC (TNBC) patients using immunohistochemistry, to compare it with non-metastatic ALNs (ALNs-), and to determine their relationship with patient outcomes. We found differences in the immune concentrations of matched ALNs (ALNs- vs. ALNs+) from patients with positive nodal status in either LA or TNBC subtypes. In contrast, compared with LA, the levels of immune cells in ALNs- of the TNBC profile differ much more from ALNs+ than in the LA subtype, regardless of the nodal status. In addition, TNBC patients with higher levels of CD4 and CD8 lymphocytes in ALNs+ have worse cancer-specific survival (CSS) and higher levels of CD83 dendritic cells (DCs) are related to worse CSS and time to progression (TTP). Conversely, LA patients with higher levels of CD21 DC showed better TTP. Our results showed that ALN immune profiles and their influence on disease evolution vary by molecular BC subtype and nodal status, suggesting that accurate ALN immune profiling at diagnosis could provide new insights into the immune BC landscape. These observations require validation in larger, prospective cohorts before they can be reliably used to inform clinical decision-making.

Vestibular rehabilitation is recommended in Menière's disease in case of uncompensated spontaneous progressive vestibular deficit or surgical or medical vestibular suppression (gentamicin injection). Rehabilitation should await a period of 3 months' stability, and be adapted to the individual complaint. It should be supervised by a rehabilitation professional: self-rehabilitation is not recommended.

The deadly COVID-19 outbreak which started in Wuhan city of China in December 2019, created a dangerous Public Health Disaster the world has ever witnessed. Bats have been widely recognised as natural reservoir hosts of several zoonotic diseases, such as severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) caused by coronaviruses. A new bat coronavirus similar to the virus resembling COVID-19, has been discovered recently by researchers at the Wuhan Institute of Virology in China. The new virus named as 'HKU5-CoV-2, carries the risk of animal-to-human transmission. This paper shares the most recent information on the virus and views of other eminent scientists regarding its potential to start another pandemic.

Background: Oxidative stress is associated with sleep disorders, yet the relationship between OBS-as a comprehensive measure of individual oxidative stress levels-and sleep disorders in AR patients remains unexplored. This study aimed to investigate whether OBS was associated with sleep disorders in AR patients. Methods: The data presented in this study were obtained from the NHANES 2005-2006 database. Sleep disorder was determined by participants' responses to the question ‘Ever told by a doctor have a sleep disorder?’ in the NHANES questionnaire. Univariate and multivariate logistic regression were used to analyse the association between OBS, dietary OBS, lifestyle OBS, and sleep disorders. The nonlinear relationship was further explored by RCS analysis. Mediating analysis was conducted to investigate potential mediating factors influencing the relationship between OBS/lifestyle OBS and sleep disorders. Results: The data of 904 patients with AR were included in this study, of which 64 patients had sleep disorders, and 840 patients had no sleep disorders. OBS and lifestyle OBS were associated with sleep disorders in AR patients. RCS results revealed that OBS (P for nonlinear=0.579) and lifestyle OBS (P for nonlinear=0.876) had a negative and linear relationship with sleep disorders. The results of the mediating analysis showed that direct HDL-C was a mediator in the relationship between OBS and sleep disorders, as well as lifestyle OBS and sleep disorders. Conclusions: OBS and lifestyle OBS were associated with sleep disorders in AR patients. Besides, direct HDL-C was a mediator in their relationship.

Artykuł podejmuje analizę instytucji ulg w spłacie zobowiązań podatkowych przewidzianych w art. 67a Ordynacji podatkowej, ze szczególnym uwzględnieniem przesłanek i granic ich stosowania oraz zakresu sądowej kontroli decyzji organów podatkowych w tym obszarze. Autor wskazuje, że możliwość umorzenia zaległości podatkowych stanowi szczególną formę indywidualizacji obciążeń fiskalnych, której celem nie jest zniesienie zasady powszechności opodatkowania, lecz jej korekta w sytuacjach, gdy realna zdolność podatnika do poniesienia ciężarów publicznych jest ograniczona. Analiza obejmuje zarówno materialnoprawne kryteria zastosowania omawianego przepisu, jak i mechanizmy kontroli sądowej, ze szczególnym naciskiem na problematykę granic uznania administracyjnego.

Beslenme ve bağırsak-beyin ekseninin beyin sağlığı ve bilişsel işlevler için önemi giderek daha fazla kabul görmektedir. Beslenme müdahaleleri, beyin bozukluklarını önleme ve/veya tedavi etme potansiyeli açısından test edilmektedir. 12 ila 48 saat boyunca kalori alımının kesilmesi veya büyük ölçüde sınırlandırılması ve bununla düzenli beslenme dönemlerinin dönüşümlü olarak uygulandığı aralıklı oruç (IF), hayvan modellerinde nörobiyolojik sağlık açısından umut verici sonuçlar göstermiştir. Bu derleme makalesinde, IF'nin bilişsel işlevler üzerindeki potansiyel faydaları ve hayvanlar ve insanlarda beyinle ilgili bozuklukların önlenmesi ve ilerlemesi üzerindeki olası etkileri tartışılmaktadır. Bunu, metabolik, hücresel ve sirkadiyen mekanizmalar yoluyla beyinde anatomik ve fonksiyonel değişikliklere yol açan IF'nin etkilerini özetleyerek yapıyoruz. Derlememiz, IF'nin sağlıklı deneklerde bilişsel işlevler üzerinde kısa vadede olumlu bir etkisi olduğuna dair net bir kanıt olmadığını göstermektedir. Klinik çalışmalar, IF'nin epilepsi, Alzheimer hastalığı ve multipl sklerozun hastalık semptomları ve ilerlemesi üzerinde faydaları olduğunu göstermektedir. Hayvan çalışmalarından elde edilen bulgular, Parkinson hastalığı, iskemik inme, otizm spektrum bozukluğu ve duygudurum ve anksiyete bozukluklarının IF'den fayda sağlayabileceği mekanizmaları göstermektedir. Gelecekteki araştırmalar, IF'nin olumlu etkilerinin yaş veya obezite varlığından bağımsız olarak geçerli olup olmadığını ortaya çıkarmalıdır. Ayrıca, oruç tutma düzenindeki farklılıklar, toplam kalori alımı ve belirli besinlerin alımı, IF'nin başarısında önemli bileşenler olabilir. Ayrıca, oruç tutma alışkanlıklarının farklılıkları, toplam kalori alımı ve belirli besinlerin alımı, IF'nin başarısında önemli faktörler olabilir. Boylamsal çalışmalar ve randomize klinik çalışmalar (RCT'ler), IF'nin beyinle ilgili hastalıkların gelişimi ve ilerlemesi üzerindeki uzun vadeli etkilerine ışık tutacaktır.

Introducción: La fenilcetonuria (PKU) es un error congénito del metabolismo causado por la deficiencia de fenilalanina hidroxilasa, que altera la conversión de fenilalanina en tirosina. El objetivo de este artículo es describir el manejo combinado de leche materna y fórmula libre de fenilalanina en una lactante con PKU y analizar la evidencia que respalda esta estrategia en Latinoamérica. Caso clínico: Lactante peruana diagnosticada de PKU al primer mes de vida mediante tamizaje neonatal. Se indicó fórmula libre de fenilalanina (70%) y lactancia materna (30 %). La fenilalanina sérica descendió de 9,48 a 1,72 mg/dL. Presentó crecimiento ponderal adecuado y talla en límite inferior (−1,88 DE). Discusión: La intervención fue efectiva para alcanzar el rango terapéutico fenilalanina sérica (2–6 mg/dL), respaldada por literatura que evidencia resultados con esta combinación. Conclusión: Esta estrategia es segura y eficaz si se realiza monitoreo bioquímico frecuente.

Bu çalışmada, son dönem Osmanlı âlimlerinden Muhammed Zâhid el-Kevserî’nin sahih hadis anlayışı, klasik hadis usulü literatürü çerçevesinde ele alınmaktadır. Kevserî, hadislerin sıhhatini yalnızca sened merkezli kriterlerle sınırlı görmez; metin tenkidi, şâzlık, illet ve rivayetlerin dinin genel ilkeleriyle uyumu gibi ölçütlerin de dikkate alınmasını savunur. Ona göre “sahih” kavramı mutlak doğruluk değil, “zahirde sahih görünme” anlamı taşır. Bu noktada, İbnü’s-Salâh’ın Sahîhayn’daki rivayetlerin icmâ ile kesin bilgi ifade ettiği iddiasını eleştirir ve Buhârî ile Müslim’in mutlak otoriteye dönüştürülmesini reddeder. Kevserî, ferd hadislerin Sahîhayn’da yer almasını, bazı raviler hakkında zayıflık bulunmasına rağmen onlardan rivayet yapılmasını örnek göstererek hadisçilerin koyduğu şartların uygulamada esnek olduğunu belirtir. Bununla birlikte, rivayet tenkidini bütünüyle reddetmez; fakat fakihlerin kıyas, maslahat ve amel gibi usûlî ölçütlerle desteklenen daha geniş bir yaklaşımı gerekli görür. Sonuç olarak Kevserî, klasik hadisçiliği mutlaklaştırmadan ama temel ölçütlerini de yok saymadan, rivayet ve dirayeti birlikte değerlendiren, metin merkezli ve eleştirel bir metodoloji geliştirmiştir. Bu yaklaşım, hem geleneğe bağlı hem de geleceğe açık dengeli bir sahih hadis anlayışını temsil etmektedir.

Purpose: To report the outcomes of a small case series of patients with periorbital necrotizing fasciitis (PONF) treated with high-dose intravenous antibiotics and dilute, pure hypochlorous acid (HOCL) irrigated through affected tissues as well as sprayed topically, with no tissue debridement. Methods: In this single-center, retrospective chart review, 6 patients were identified between May 1, 2022, and May 1, 2024, with PONF who had HOCL used during their treatment. The primary outcome measures included successful eradication of infection, acceptable aesthetic result with minimal or no reconstruction required, and little or no loss of vision. Results of treatment were compared with those PONF patients in the literature treated more traditionally with antibiotics and debridement, and those treated with antibiotics alone. Results: Of the 6 patients identified with PONF, all 6 were treated with dilute, pure HOCL (0.033%). The median age of the patients was 51 (range 32–73). The female-to-male ratio was equal. The median follow-up time since the first presentation was 158 days (range 30–180). Streptococcus pyogenes was the most common causative organism, found in 80% of cases. No patient underwent tissue debridement in the periocular area. All patients recovered with minimal sequelae. No patient reported loss of vision on their final follow-up visit. There were no patients who required enucleation or exenteration and no patients died because of PONF. Conclusions: The authors describe a simple method of introducing dilute, pure HOCL (0.033%) without hypochlorite or sodium hypochlorite as impurities via irrigation and topical spray into the treatment plan for PONF. There was little if any loss of tissue with this treatment in this series. The outcomes compared favorably to those outcomes in the literature of PONF patients treated more traditionally with antibiotics and debridement, and those patients treated more conservatively with antibiotics alone. HOCL irrigation and spray techniques appear to be beneficial in the management of PONF and decrease the need to debride, allowing faster disease resolution and contributing to favorable outcomes.

Objectives: To evaluate the experiences of wearing scleral lenses while self-contained underwater breathing apparatus (SCUBA) diving in a large number of dives. Methods: An anonymous online survey for diving scleral lens wearers worldwide was distributed. The data were collected between May 2019 and November 2022. The survey sought responses on participants' age and sex, SCUBA dive–related characteristics and scleral lens wear–related questions, and eye-related symptoms after the dive. Results: A total of 67 scleral lens wearers completed the questionnaire (63% male). A median of 150 dives were performed while wearing the scleral lenses, with 26,360 dives in total. Seven participants experienced more redness, and five had less clear eyes after the dive. Two adverse events in 2 of 26,360 dives (0.007%) were reported by two participants. The scleral lens was more cloudy during diving in four subjects, two experienced a more cloudy scleral lens after diving, and the scleral lenses were more deposited after diving in three subjects. During seven dives of seven unique divers, a scleral lens was lost. After the dive, 10 divers experienced more tightness of the scleral lens on removal, whereas eight found them easier to remove. Conclusions: Scleral lens wear while SCUBA diving seems to cause few complications and seems relatively safe.

Abstract Background The importance of digital health education is widely recognized; however, structural and knowledge deficits hinder its effective integration into training and on-the-job upskilling programs. Tackling these challenges will equip clinicians to navigate the fast-evolving digital mental health landscape confidently. Objective This study aims to investigate the prevalence of digital health education and training needs for New Zealand mental health clinicians and trainees, including how psychology and psychiatry teaching programs are including eHealth and digital mental health tools in their curriculums. Methods A mixed method study was conducted between August 2021 and February 2022: (1) a survey of mental health clinicians and trainees investigating existing and desired training in digital mental health tools, (2) follow-up in-depth one-on-one interviews with a subsample of survey participants, and (3) in-depth one-on-one interviews with educators (program or curriculum coordinators) within psychology and psychiatry training programs. Results The study comprised a survey of 118 clinicians, follow-up interviews with 17 clinicians, and interviews with 4 program directors of relevant training programs. The survey results revealed that 75% (n=88) of the clinicians had not received formal digital health training, yet 69% (n=81) had engaged in self-directed learning. Interest in further training was strong, with 83% (n=98) expressing moderate-to-high interest. Two key themes emerged from the clinician interviews: (1) openness to upskilling , reflecting a willingness to learn, and (2) barriers of time and leadership , highlighting challenges in accessing training due to workloads and limited institutional support. From the program director interviews, three themes were identified: (1) curriculum overload , reflecting difficulties incorporating new content into already crowded programs; (2) uncertainty and inconsistency , with educators unsure about the scope and delivery of digital mental health education; and (3) growth and future potential , highlighting optimism about integrating digital health training into curricula. Conclusions The findings reveal a pressing gap in formal digital health training for clinicians despite widespread interest and enthusiasm for upskilling. Key barriers—time constraints, limited institutional leadership, and a lack of educator expertise—are slowing progress.

ABSTRACT Aim This study investigated whether family composition and other household factors are associated with adherence to vitamin D supplementation during infancy. Methods A cross‐sectional survey was conducted between March 21 and April 30, 2023, among caregivers of infants aged 4 weeks to 12 months at the Ca′ Granda Hospital, Milan, Italy. The survey investigated demographic data, health status, daily vitamin D 3 administration frequency, and family characteristics. Multiple logistic regression was used to identify factors associated with poor adherence. Results A total of 241 caregivers completed the survey. Overall, 85% of infants received vitamin D supplements at least four times per week. Good adherence was more frequent in families with one child (91%) compared with those with two or more children (78%). In multivariable analysis, the presence of siblings was the only factor significantly associated with poor adherence (odds ratio 2.72, 95% confidence interval 1.25–5.92). No associations were found with caregiver education, infant age, chronic disease, intercurrent illness, or time spent outdoors. Conclusion In this cohort, adherence to vitamin D prophylaxis was significantly lower in families with more than one child. Awareness of this association could inform counselling strategies and the design of interventions to sustain adherence.

Introduction: Road traffic accidents are a major public health concern in Nepal, causing significant morbidity and mortality. The study goal was to determine the trends of road traffic injuries in Nepal from Fiscal Years 2020/21 to 2024/25 (mid-July 2020 – mid-July 2025). Methods: A descriptive retrospective study was conducted to analyze de-identified and pooled road traffic accident records from Nepal, following receipt of ethical clearance from the Nepal Health Research Council (ERB no. 607_2025). Data was analyzed using Microsoft Excel 2019. Results: The findings show that road traffic accidents have shown an apparent spike from FY 2020/21 to 2024/25, with both vehicle collisions and accident incidences ascended significantly. Reported vehicle crashes rose from 33135 in FY 2020/21 to 43165 in FY 2024/25, while total RTAs increased from 20640 to 28692 over the same period. RTAs surged in six provinces of Nepal. Two-wheelers, four-wheelers, and public transport vehicles accounted for the majority of incidents. Speeding 46398 (44.08%), mechanical failure 1173 (39.14%), potholes 685 (21.69%), pedestrian road crossings 5523 (79.55%), and unfavourable weather conditions like fog and mist 122 (26.23%) were major contributing factors. Although injuries increased significantly, fatality rates did not rise same proportion. Conclusions: The results show that road traffic accidents are becoming more common in Nepal, especially involving motorbikes, four-wheelers, and public vehicles. Reducing accident rates and their effects may require increased road safety enforcement, better infrastructure, and awareness-raising initiatives.

Purpose: This study aimed to investigate the prevalence of high-risk drinking among women of childbearing age and to identify factors associated with high-risk drinking.Methods: Data were obtained from the first (2022) and second (2023) years of the ninth Korea National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. The study sample comprised 2,101 women of childbearing age (19–49 years). Data were analyzed using complex sample analysis to appropriately account for population weights, survey clustering, and stratified sampling.Results: Among respondents, 9.5% were classified as high-risk drinkers. Significant differences in alcohol consumption were observed according to education level, employment status, skipping breakfast in the past 2 days, physical activity intensity, perceived stress level, smoking status, and dental check-up status. In the multiple logistic regression analysis, education level (odds ratio [OR]=1.26, p=.015), employment status (OR=1.44, p=.045), skipping breakfast in the past 2 days (OR=1.81, p&lt;.001), smoking status (OR=4.20, p&lt;.001), and dental check-up status (OR=1.70, p=.002) remained significantly associated with high-risk drinking.Conclusion: These findings highlight the need for targeted public health strategies to reduce high-risk drinking among women of childbearing age. Healthcare providers may use these findings to design interventions that strengthen preventive health behaviors, promote regular meal patterns, support smoking cessation, and encourage routine dental check-ups. Public health practitioners may also utilize these results to develop programs that promote healthy lifestyle practices in this population. Further research is needed to refine and enhance intervention strategies.

Mục tiêu: Đánh giá kết quả phẫu thuật cholesteatoma bẩm sinh tai giữa giai đoạn Potsic III. Phương pháp nghiên cứu: Mô tả loạt ca bệnh. Địa điểm nghiên cứu: Bệnh viện tai mũi họng trung ương, thời gian nghiên cứu từ năm 2017 tới năm 2025. Bệnh nhân nghiên cứu: 38 bệnh nhân. Kết quả nghiên cứu: Qua nghiên cứu 38 trường hợp cholesteatoma bẩm sinh giai đoạn Potsic III được phẫu thuật, bước đầu chúng tôi rút ra một số kết luận như sau: bệnh nhân trung bình 5,5±3,6 tuổi; Tất cả bệnh nhân được theo dõi ít nhất 6 tháng cho thấy màng nhĩ liền kín trong 36 trường hợp, tỷ lệ cải thiện sức nghe là 28 trường hợp. Có 26 ca không có tồn dư cholesteatoma sau phẫu thuật lần 1, 12 ca tồn dư sau lần thứ 1 và 2 ca trải qua phẫu thuật lần 3 để loại bỏ bệnh tích; chưa phát hiện trường hợp nào xảy ra tai biến trong và sau phẫu thuật. Kết luận: Phẫu thuật trên bệnh nhân cholesteatoma bẩm sinh tai giữa giai đoạn Potsic III là an toàn, đem lại kết quả tốt, giúp loại bỏ bệnh tích và cải thiện sức nghe cho bệnh nhân, tỷ lệ tai biến thấp, nhưng tỷ lệ tái phát còn cao.

Spor bilimleri, insan organizmasının fiziksel aktiviteye verdiği akut ve kronik yanıtları inceleyen, multidisipliner bir araştırma alanı olarak sürekli gelişim göstermektedir. Bu gelişim sürecinde; hareketin mekanik temelleri, antrenman metodolojilerinin optimizasyonu ve egzersizin fizyolojik etkilerinin derinlemesine analiz edilmesi hem elit performansın artırılması hem de halk sağlığının korunması açısından kritik öneme sahiptir. Sporda Hareket, Antrenman ve Egzersiz Üzerine Akademik Araştırmalar başlıklı bu eser, alanındaki güncel gelişmeleri kanıta dayalı bir perspektifle ele alan özgün çalışmaları bir araya getirmektedir. Kitap kapsamında; biyomekanik analizlerden motor kontrol süreçlerine, yeni nesil antrenman paradigmalarından metabolik adaptasyonlara kadar geniş bir literatür yelpazesi irdelenmektedir. Her bir bölüm, teorik çerçeveyi ampirik verilerle destekleyerek, spor bilimlerindeki karmaşık fenomenlerin anlaşılmasına katkı sağlamayı amaçlamaktadır. Bu çalışma, sadece akademik bir referans kaynağı olmakla kalmayıp, aynı zamanda uygulayıcılar için bilimsel temelli bir rehber niteliği taşımaktadır. Bilimsel rigor ve akademik tarafsızlık ilkeleriyle hazırlanan bu seçki, spor bilimleri literatüründeki bilgi birikimine özgün bir katkı sunma misyonu taşımaktadır.

Çalışmada hicrî üçüncü asrın ilk yarısında hadis literatüründe kaderî düşünceye yönelik doğrudan ve dolaylı atıflar ele alınmaktadır. Kader inancına dair tartışmalar, kelâmî bir ihtilaf olmanın yanı sıra hadis râvilerinin güvenilirliğini ve rivayet ehliyetlerini belirleyen ölçütlerden biri olarak değerlendirilmiştir. Bu çerçevede Saîd b. Mansûr (öl. 227/842), Yahyâ b. Maîn (öl. 233/848) ve Ahmed b. Hanbel (öl. 241/855) gibi hicrî üçüncü asırda hadis ilmiyle temayüz etmiş muhaddislerin eserleri esas alınarak, kaderîlik karşıtı söylemin ricâl tenkidi, metin tahlilleri ve toplumsal dışlama pratiklerinde nasıl somutlaştığı incelenmiştir. Eserlerde yer alan satır arası imalar, kullanılan terimler ve sosyal dışlanma pratikleri, kaderîliğin yalnızca itikadî bir mesele olarak değil, bilginin güvenilirliği ve ilmî itimat bağlamında da ele alındığını göstermektedir. Çalışmada yöntem olarak “kaderî”, “iʿtikad” ve “bidʿa” gibi temel terimler üzerinden sistematik tarama yapılmış, elde edilen veriler hadis metinleri, râvî biyografileri ve sosyo-hukuki yansımalar şeklinde sınıflandırılmıştır. Böylece kader meselesinin, dönemin hadis literatüründeki yeri, rivâyet kabulü ve Sünnî kimliğin inşasında belirleyici bir tasnif ölçütü hâline geldiği tespit edilmiştir.

บทความนี้มีวัตถุประสงค์เพื่อพัฒนากรอบแนวคิดและศึกษาอิทธิพลของสมรรถนะด้านดิจิทัลที่ส่งผลต่อพฤติกรรมเชิงนวัตกรรมของบุคลากรสายสนับสนุนวิชาการ มหาวิทยาลัยราชภัฏสวนสุนันทา โดยการวิจัยเริ่มต้นจากการศึกษาเชิงเอกสารเพื่อสังเคราะห์แนวคิด ทฤษฎี และงานวิจัยที่เกี่ยวข้อง ผลการวิจัยเชิงเอกสาร พบว่า กรอบแนวคิดของสมรรถนะด้านดิจิทัลที่เหมาะสมประกอบด้วย 4 องค์ประกอบ ได้แก่ 1) การเข้าใจดิจิทัล 2) ทักษะการใช้สื่อและดิจิทัล 3) การแก้ปัญหาด้วยเครื่องมือดิจิทัล และ 4) การปรับตัวการเปลี่ยนแปลงดิจิทัล ส่วนกรอบแนวคิดของพฤติกรรมเชิงนวัตกรรมประกอบด้วย 4 องค์ประกอบ ได้แก่ 1) การแสวงหาโอกาส 2) ความคิดริเริ่ม 3) ผู้นำทางความคิด และ 4) การประยุกต์ใช้ ซึ่งกรอบแนวคิดที่ได้จากการสังเคราะห์นี้ถูกนำไปใช้สร้างเครื่องมือวิจัยเชิงปริมาณ คือ แบบสอบถาม เพื่อเก็บข้อมูลจากกลุ่มตัวอย่างบุคลากรสายสนับสนุนวิชาการ จำนวน 231 คน และวิเคราะห์ข้อมูลด้วยการวิเคราะห์การถดถอยพหุคูณต่อไป ผลลัพธ์จากการสังเคราะห์ได้เป็นกรอบแนวคิดที่ชัดเจนสำหรับศึกษาความสัมพันธ์เชิงประจักษ์ระหว่างตัวแปรทั้งสอง ซึ่งจะนำไปสู่ข้อเสนอแนะในการพัฒนาศักยภาพบุคลากรเพื่อส่งเสริมวัฒนธรรมนวัตกรรมในมหาวิทยาลัยได้อย่างมีทิศทาง

Photobiomodulation (PBM) is a non-invasive therapeutic strategy that uses specific light wavelengths to stimulate cellular processes that promote tissue repair, reduce inflammation, and alleviate pain. In this study, we evaluated the efficacy of a high-intensity 980 nm near-infrared (NIR) pulsed laser in a murine model of ovalbumin (OVA)-induced allergic asthma. In OVA-sensitized mice, typical allergic features were noted, including airway wall thickening, significant peribronchial and perivascular inflammatory cell infiltration, and compressed alveolar spaces. NIR PBM treatment markedly attenuated these histological changes. At the molecular level, PBM significantly downregulated type 2 cytokine gene expression, including IL-4, IL-5 and IL-13, in the lung tissue. Flow cytometry analyses further revealed that PBM reduced the infiltration of pulmonary eosinophils and inflammatory monocytes. Transcriptomic profiling coupled with gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) indicated that PBM suppressed NF-κB-mediated inflammatory signaling while modulating Th2-related responses. Collectively, our findings demonstrate that high-intensity 980 nm NIR PBM effectively mitigates key features of allergic asthma in a murine model, supporting its potential as a non-pharmacological, non-invasive adjunct therapy for asthma management.

Background: Acute respiratory infections are among the leading causes of morbidity and mortality in children under five years, particularly in low- and middle-income countries. This study aimed to estimate the prevalence of ARIs and to identify the determinants of their occurrence in children under five in the Sado arrondissement (or borough) in Benin. Methods: This was an analytical cross-sectional study involving 131 children under five years and their mothers recruited by convenience sampling in the community and at the Sado health centre using the integrated management of childhood illness (IMCI) register. Data collected through a questionnaire were analysed using STATA version 14. The primary outcome was the occurrence of acute respiratory infections in the child. Associations between independent variables and the occurrence of acute respiratory infections were explored using bivariate analyses and multivariate logistic regression at a 5% significance threshold. Results: The prevalence of acute respiratory infections was 64.12% (95% CI=55.45-71.95%). The determinants for the occurrence of acute respiratory infections were: mother’s marital status (OR=6.06; 95% CI=1.59-23.02; p=0.008), number of people living in the household (OR=0.34; 95% CI=0.12-0.94; p=0.038), cooking meals inside the rooms of the house (OR=0.39; 95% CI=0.16-0.91; p=0.030) and living near a dusty road (OR=3.19; 95% CI=1.18-8.58; p=0.022). Conclusions: The high frequency of acute respiratory infections in Sado and the influence of sociodemographic and environmental factors underscore the necessity for integrated interventions. Strengthening mother’ awareness and control measures targeting these factors (housing conditions, exposure to domestic and environmental pollutants, social determinants) will sustainably reduce the burden of acute respiratory infections in children under five years.

Background Flexible Nasopharyngolaryngoscopy (NPL) is minimally invasive diagnostic procedure done with the use of a flexible endoscope to examine anatomical and pathological changes in the nasal cavity, pharynx and larynx. Many patients visit ENT OPD with upper airway problems with clinical features like nasal obstruction, throat discomfort, change in voice, difficulty in swallowing etc. This study aims to assess the nasopharyngolaryngoscopic findings in patients presenting with upper airway disorders. MethodsThis is a single center, retrospective, descriptive cross-sectional study conducted among 720 patients who underwent NPL for various upper airway problems in Department of ENT &amp; HNS, Bharatpur Hospital, Chitwan from 1st Jan 2024 April to 31st Dec 2024. Ethical approval from IRC of Bharatpur Hospital (Ref No. 081/82-076). Results720 patients between age group of six to ninety years were studied. Female (473) outnumbered male (247) with ratio 1:0.52. Majority of the patients (268, 37.2%) presented with complaint of foreign body sensation in throat. NPL findings was normal in majority of patients (n=197, 27.4%), followed by Laryngopharyngeal reflux (126, 17.5%). Benign lesions like polyp, nodule, cyst were common in larynx in comparison to malignant lesion. Deviated nasal septum was also common among the patients (77, 10.7%). Conclusions NPL is a cost-effective brief procedure which is helpful to find out the affected site causing upper airway disorder even though findings can be normal in some of the cases. Flexible NPL examination can be performed in patients without any delay for early diagnosis of pathology in nose, pharynx and larynx.

Background: Prostate cancer is the most frequently diagnosed malignancy among men. Screening strategies aimed at reducing prostate cancer–related mortality have raised concerns about overdiagnosis—defined as the detection of cancers that would not cause symptoms or death during a patient’s lifetime—and subsequent overtreatment. This review systematically evaluates whether PSA-based screening primarily enables early detection or contributes to clinically relevant overdiagnosis. Methods: Following PRISMA guidelines, randomized controlled trials and cohort studies enrolling men aged ≥ 40 years without prior prostate cancer were included. Studies compared PSA-based screening with no screening or alternative strategies. PubMed, Web of Science, and Scopus were searched from 2015 onward. Risk of bias was assessed using RoB2 for randomized trials and the Newcastle–Ottawa Scale for cohort studies. Primary outcomes included prostate cancer diagnosis, overdiagnosis, prostate cancer–specific mortality, and overall mortality. Results: Thirteen studies enrolling men aged 45–74 years, with follow-up ranging from 2 to 22 years and sample sizes from 4,276 to 415,357, were included. Biopsy-related complications were infrequent (≤2%), and MRI-guided biopsy was associated with fewer infectious complications compared with standard transrectal biopsy. Overdiagnosis estimates varied widely across studies; however, the pooled estimate was not statistically significant (RR 1.56 [95% CI 0.65–3.79]). PSA screening did not reduce overall mortality (RR 0.99 [95% CI 0.88–1.11]). Prostate cancer–specific mortality was modestly reduced, with pooled results borderline significant (IRR 0.87 [95% CI 0.76–1.00]). Substantial heterogeneity and risk of bias across studies limited the certainty and generalizability of pooled estimates. Conclusion: PSA-based screening is associated with a modest reduction in prostate cancer–specific mortality without an improvement in overall survival. Lower overdiagnosis rates observed in more recent, risk-adapted screening strategies highlight the importance of shared decision-making and support the integration of modern diagnostic tools to minimize harms. Further well-designed, representative trials are needed to define optimal screening pathways across diverse populations

This study examines delayed childbearing, a growing reproductive health concern, among urban professional women in Hebei, China, where traditional family expectations intersect with intense workplace competition. It explores how women perceive childbearing under work pressure, how work-related stress shapes the postponement of births, and how support systems intervene in this process. This qualitative study, using a constructivist grounded theory approach, conducted in-depth interviews with 26 married professional women aged 28–40 working in enterprises, public institutions, and government agencies. Analysis identified four themes: workplace “ideal worker” norms, embodied work-related strain, insufficient multi-level support, and strategic postponement of childbearing. The study concludes that delayed childbearing among urban professional women is a rational response to overlapping pressures rather than weak fertility intentions, with potential consequences for reproductive health risks associated with advanced maternal age. It provides policy implications for building more fertility-friendly work environments and gender-equitable support systems and offers comparative insights into similar patterns of fertility postponement in other rapidly modernizing settings, including parts of Africa.

A 5-month-old mixed-breed dog was presented with progressive ambulatory paraparesis. Neurological examination was consistent with thoracolumbar myelopathy. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a spinal (sub)arachnoid diverticulum (SAD) at T8–T9 with spinal cord compression associated with central canal dilation and intramedullary edema. Computed tomography (CT) showed generalized caudal articular process dysplasia (CAPD) from T2 to T9 vertebras. Considering diagnostic imaging results, symptoms were strongly suspected to be due to spinal cord compression associated with CAPD-induced SAD. Surgery was performed and cystic structure was detached. One month after the surgery, no progression of clinical symptoms was observed. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first reported case of SAD causing thoracolumbar myelopathy in a non-brachycephalic dog with generalized CAPD. These findings highlight the potential role of CAPD as a contributing factor to SAD formation. A combination of CT and MRI is recommended for thorough evaluation of vertebral structures and alignment in similar cases.

Objective : Acoustic neuromas, or vestibular schwannomas, pose significant surgical challenges due to their proximity to critical cranial nerves, particularly the facial nerve. The primary goal in their surgical treatment is to achieve maximal tumor removal while preserving neurological function. Recent advancements in surgical technology have introduced neuroendoscopy as an adjunctive tool that can enhance visualization during surgery. This study aimed to evaluate the efficacy of integrating neuroendoscopy with intraoperative electrophysiological monitoring in near-total resection surgeries for acoustic neuroma.Methods : We conducted a retrospective cohort study comparing 71 patients who underwent neuroendoscopy-assisted microsurgery technique with 68 patients who received standard care group technique. Both groups underwent the suboccipital retrosigmoid sinus approach for tumor resection with intraoperative electrophysiological monitoring. Surgical outcomes, including residual tumor size, facial nerve function, audiological outcomes, and complication rates, were compared between the two groups.Results : The neuroendoscopy-assisted group demonstrated a significantly smaller residual tumor size, improved immediate and 1-year postoperative House-Brackmann grades, and a higher facial nerve preservation rate compared to the standard care group (&lt;i&gt;p&lt;/i&gt;&lt;0.05). There was no significant difference in operation time, blood loss, cerebrospinal fluid leakage, or complication rates between the groups. Word recognition scores after a year were significantly higher in the neuroendoscopy-assisted group (p&lt;0.05).Conclusion : The integration of neuroendoscopy-assisted microsurgery technique in acoustic neuroma surgery improves facial nerve function and residual tumor size without increasing surgical complications. These findings support the utility of this combined approach in enhancing surgical outcomes for patients with acoustic neuroma.

Quantitative DCE-MRI biomarkers have good test-retest repeatability on both the whole synovium and synovial subregions, with K<sup>trans</sup> showing the best performance.

Giriş ve Hedefler Bu çalışma, orman ekosistemlerinde tür dağılım modelleme yöntemlerini kapsamlı biçimde ele alarak bu yöntemlerin sürdürülebilir orman yönetimindeki rolünü ortaya koymak amacıyla hazırlanmıştır. Yöntemler Çalışmada, Lojistik Regresyon, Genelleştirilmiş Eklemeli Modeller (GAM), Sınıflandırma ve Regresyon Ağaçları (CART), Maksimum Entropi (MaxEnt), Genetik Algoritmalar ile Kural Seti Tahmini (GARP) ve Rastgele Orman olmak üzere altı modelleme yöntemleri ilgili literatür taraması yapılmıştır. Bulgular Tür dağılım modelleri, yaban hayvanları, sürüngenler, böcekler, kuşlar ve bitki türleri için potansiyel dağılım veya habitat uygunluk haritalarının oluşturulmasında etkin bir araç olarak kullanıldığı görülmüştür. Ayrıca, bu modeller, iklim değişikliğinin etkilerini değerlendirmek, türlerin korunması ve yönetimine yönelik stratejiler geliştirmek açısından önemli olduğu belirlenmiştir. Modelleme süreçlerinde kullanılan tanımlayıcı (bağımsız) veri kaynakları arasında topografik veriler, iklim değişkenleri ve uzaktan algılama verileri ön plana çıktığı tespit edilmiştir. Sonuçlar Çalışmalar, türlerin ekolojik gereksinimlerini anlamada ve habitat uygunluk haritalarının oluşturulmasında bu yöntemlerin başarıyla uygulandığını ortaya koymaktadır. Bu çalışmada tür dağılım modelleme yöntemlerinin orman ekosistemlerinin korunması ve sürdürülebilir yönetimindeki rolü vurgulanmış ve bu modellerin gelecekteki araştırmalar için taşıdığı önem hakkında açıklamalar yapılmıştır.

Objective: This cross-sectional pilot study aimed to translate, culturally adapt, and validate the Korean version of the Pediatric Eating Assessment Tool-10 (K-Pedi-EAT-10).Methods: To translate, culturally adapt, and validate the Korean version of the Pediatric Eating Assessment Tool-10 (K-Pedi-EAT-10).Results: The K-Pedi-EAT-10 demonstrated excellent internal consistency (Cronbach’s α=0.956) and strong test–retest reliability (ICC=0.988; 95% CI, 0.971–0.995). Content validity indices were high (I-CVI&gt;0.80 for all items; S-CVI/Ave=0.92 for relevance, 0.88 for clarity). Children with dysphagia showed markedly higher K-Pedi-EAT-10 total scores (16.15±9.24) than controls (0.31±0.72; U=9.5, Z=-4.053, p&lt;0.001), confirming discriminative validity. Higher K-Pedi-EAT-10 scores were observed in children with aspiration (Penetration-Aspiration Scale [PAS]≥6) than in those without (p&lt;0.05). Significant correlations were found between K-Pedi-EAT-10 total and PAS scores (r=0.705, p=0.007), confirming its potential utility as a screening tool that reflects aspiration severity without radiation exposure from videofluoroscopic swallowing study. Receiver operating characteristic analysis yielded an area under the curve of 0.98 (95% CI, 0.95–1.00) and identified a cut-off score of 19 for predicting aspiration, with 100% sensitivity and 85.7% specificity.Conclusion: The K-Pedi-EAT-10 is a reliable, valid, and non-invasive tool for screening pediatric dysphagia. Its strong psychometric performance supports its potential use for the early identification and timely intervention of children at risk for dysphagia in clinical practice.

Giriş ve Amaç: Örgütsel sinizm, çalışanların kurumlarıyla ilgili kararlara katılımlarında sessiz kalmalarına neden olmakta ve örgütsel sessizlik olgusunun oluşmasında rol oynamaktadır. Bu anlamda araştırmanın amacı hekimlerin örgütsel sinizm düzeylerinin örgütsel sessizliklerine etkisini incelemektir. Gereç ve Yöntemler: Bu araştırmada nicel araştırma deseni kullanılmış ve tanımlayıcı bulgulara yer verilmiştir. Araştırma örneklemini Konya'da görev yapan 445 hekim oluşmaktadır. Bu araştırma için Örgütsel Sinizm Ölçeği ve Örgütsel Sessizlik Ölçeği kullanılmıştır. Araştırmada ihtiyaç duyulan veriler kesitsel ve çevrimiçi olarak belirli tarih aralığında toplanmıştır. Bulgular: Hekimlerin %59,1'i kadın, %68,3'ü evli ve %40'ı 25-35 yaş aralığındadır. Katılımcıların %38,4'ünün 11 ile 20 yıl arasında mesleki deneyime sahip olduğu ve %56,9'unun kamu hastanesinde çalıştığı belirlenmiştir. Hekimlerin %70,3'ünün çalıştıkları hastaneden memnun oldukları belirlenmiştir. Örgütsel sinizm ile örgütsel sessizlik arasında pozitif yönlü, orta düzeyde (r=0,456 p

Hypertension is the one of the leading causes of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. Early detection of individuals at elevated risk is critical, yet conventional prediction models fail to capture nonlinear and high-dimensional interactions among epidemiological and behavioral determinants. Machine learning (ML) offers new opportunities for accurate, population-level risk stratification. We conducted a secondary analysis of the Tamil Nadu STEPS survey 2020, applying supervised ML algorithms—including boosting, k-nearest neighbours, decision tree, random forest, and support vector machine—to predict hypertension risk. Predictors included demographic, anthropometric, lifestyle, and behavioral variables. Models were implemented in JASP, and their performance was evaluated using accuracy, area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC), precision, recall, and F1 score. Among the algorithms tested, the random forest classifier demonstrated the most balanced performance (accuracy 65.5%, AUC 0.708, precision 64.2%, recall 65.5%, F1 score 64.7%). Feature importance analysis identified age as the strongest predictor, followed by waist circumference, while diet and physical activity contributed minimally. The confusion matrix confirmed the model’s balanced sensitivity and specificity, reducing both false negatives and false positives. This study highlights the potential of machine learning, particularly random forest models, for hypertension risk prediction in Indian populations. By leveraging routinely collected survey data, ML can enable scalable, non-invasive screening and inform targeted public health interventions. Integration of richer clinical and genetic features and ensemble methods may further improve predictive accuracy.

Anemia among pregnant women is a significant factor contributing to maternal and infant mortality, preterm birth, and stunting if not promptly addressed (Indonesian Health Profile, 2023). One preventive measure is meeting nutritional needs through the consumption of dates, which are rich in iron—approximately 13.7 mg per 100 grams (Satuhu, 2010). The role of midwives in managing anemia, as stated in Midwifery Care Standard No. 6, includes prevention, detection, treatment, and referral of anemia cases in pregnant women. An educational outreach on the benefits of dates was conducted at the Permata Bunda Clinic to increase pregnant women’s knowledge about improving hemoglobin (Hb) levels through date consumption. Among the 39 participants, the average pre-test score was 63.62, which increased to 77.08 in the post-test, showing an average gain of 20.28 points. The standard deviation also decreased from 23.77 to 12.41, indicating that participants’ knowledge became more consistent after the session. These findings demonstrate that the educational intervention on date consumption effectively enhanced the understanding of expectant mothers regarding the need to sustain adequate hemoglobin levels throughout the gestational period, contributing to the prevention of anemia, stunting, and obstetric complications.

Bu bölümde, padel oyununda performans gereksinimleri yapısal, fizyolojik, motorik, teknik–taktik ve psikolojik boyutlarıyla bütüncül bir bakış açısıyla ele alınmıştır. Padel; duvarların oyuna aktif katıldığı, 20 × 10 m’lik kapalı bir kortta temel olarak çiftler formatında oynanan, zaman–hareket özellikleri bakımından aralıklı (intermitan) bir raket sporudur. Kısa süreli yüksek şiddetli ralliler ile nispeten kısa toparlanma aralıklarının ardışık biçimde tekrarlandığı bu yapı, hem aerobik hem de anaerobik enerji sistemlerinin etkin kullanımını gerektirmekte; kalp atım hızı yanıtları genellikle maksimal KAH’ın %70–85’i düzeyinde seyretmektedir. Motorik açıdan padel; 5–10 m ivmelenmeler, çok yönlü çeviklik, alt–üst ekstremite kuvveti, güç üretimi, denge ve mobilite bileşenlerinin birlikte talep edildiği bir yapıya sahiptir. Teknik–taktik düzeyde file kontrolü, lob kullanımı, duvar vuruşları, hücum–savunma geçişleri ve çiftler oyununda alan paylaşımı (sağ/sol taraf rolleri, orta alan sorumluluğu) performansın merkezinde yer alır. Psikolojik gereksinimler ise dikkat–konsantrasyon, duygu düzenleme, stres ve kaygı yönetimi, öz yeterlik, takım içi iletişim ve uyum gibi becerileri kapsamaktadır. Bölümde ayrıca performans değerlendirmesi için fizyolojik (Yo-Yo testleri, tekrarlı sprintler), motorik (sürat, çeviklik, sıçrama), teknik–taktik (vuruş isabet oranları, match charting) ve psikolojik (motivasyon, kaygı, takım uyumu ölçekleri) test ve analiz yaklaşımları sunulmuştur. Antrenman planlaması bağlamında ise sezonluk dönemlendirme (hazırlık–yarışma–geçiş), haftalık yük dağılımı, farklı oyuncu düzeylerine göre içerik uyarlaması, fiziksel–teknik–taktik–psikolojik entegrasyon ve yük izlemi–sakatlık önleme stratejileri tartışılmıştır. Sonuç olarak padel; rekreatif katılım için erişilebilir olmakla birlikte, performans geliştirme açısından bilimsel temelli, çok boyutlu ve bireyselleştirilmiş antrenman planlaması gerektiren bir spor olarak konumlanmaktadır. Literatürdeki mevcut bulgular, antrenörler ve uygulayıcılar için pratik bir çerçeve sunarken; özellikle uzunlamasına çalışmalar, sakatlık epidemiyolojisi ve müdahale programları alanlarında yeni araştırma gereksinimlerine işaret etmektedir.

Tumour size, blood flow grade, Ki-67 expression, and axillary lymph node ultrasound diagnosis are correlated with axillary lymph node metastasis in IBC. Maximum tumour diameter ≥20 mm and abnormal axillary lymph node ultrasound are significant risk factors.

With millions being affected, Heart Failure (HF) has become a growing health concern in Asia, especially in South Asia, where it affects a younger population presenting with multiple co-morbidities. Despite global advancements in HF treatments, existing guidelines remain largely based on American and European populations; however, there is a need for tailored strategies in Asia. The present literature-based review provides an overview of the existing HF management guidelines and highlights guidelines specific to Asian countries. It further summarises findings from recent publications that describe current treatment patterns for HF, including pharmacological and non pharmacological strategies as well as the use of medical devices. While older medications continue to remain the standard of care, newer therapies show promising potential to enhance treatment effectiveness and recovery in patients with HF. Developing region-specific HF guidelines is essential, considering Asia’s unique genetic, socioeconomic and healthcarerelated factors.

Family participation plays a vital role in the success of diabetes self-management (DSM). In Indonesia, family-centered care is culturally embedded, yet limited research has explored how families experience and interpret their roles in supporting self-management among patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). This study aimed to explore family experiences in supporting diabetes self-management practices among patients with T2DM in Medan, Indonesia. A descriptive phenomenological approach was employed. Twelve family members who cared for T2DM patients at Chairuddin Panusunan Lubis Hospital were recruited using purposive sampling. Data were collected through in-depth interviews and field notes from February to May 2025. Colaizzi’s seven-step analysis method guided data analysis to extract significant statements and formulate themes. Credibility was ensured through member checking, dependability via team discussion, and confirmability through audit trails. Five interrelated themes emerged: (1) controlling diet, (2) arranging physical training (3) administering medications, (4) emotional support, and (5) utilization of health care facilities. These themes reflected how families act as emotional motivators, behavioral supervisors, and coordinators of care to strengthen patients’ adherence and self-efficacy. Family involvement was not limited to instrumental assistance but extended to emotional reinforcement and facilitation of healthcare access. Family engagement forms the backbone of effective DSM, integrating physical, emotional, and social support. Strengthening family-based interventions is essential to enhance adherence, glycemic control, and quality of life among patients with T2DM. Keyword: Family Experience, Diabetes Self-Management, Family Support, Qualitative Study, Indonesia

Background: Serum lactate is a key biomarker of tissue hypoperfusion and metabolic stress in sepsis. Although lactate clearance is widely recognized, many intensive care units record only a peak lactate within 24 h (pLac-24h). The prognostic value of pLac-24h among patients receiving blood purification therapy remains unclear in Asian intensive care settings. Methods: We retrospectively analyzed the 2018–2020 ICU dataset from MacKay Memorial Hospital, Taiwan. Among 16,693 adult ICU admissions, 2506 patients received continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) as blood purification for severe sepsis or septic shock. Of these, 1264 (50.4%) had available pLac-24h data, and 27 (1.1%) also required extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO). The primary outcome was 28-day all-cause mortality. Multivariate logistic regression adjusted for age, sex, APACHE II score, infection source, and CRRT/ECMO use. Discrimination was evaluated by receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves and decision-curve analysis. This analysis was conducted as a predefined sub-analysis of an institutional ICU database. Results: The mean age of the cohort was 65.7 ± 13.4 years, and 64.8% were male. Median pLac-24h was 5.1 mmol/L (IQR 3.2–8.6). The overall 28-day mortality among CRRT patients was 47.3%. Mortality rose progressively across pLac-24h quartiles (Q1–Q4: 28.9%, 39.4%, 54.7%, and 68.1%; p &lt; 0.001). Each 1 mmol/L increase in pLac-24h independently predicted higher mortality (adjusted OR 1.18, 95% CI 1.10–1.26, p &lt; 0.001). The area under the ROC curve for pLac-24h predicting 28-day mortality was 0.78 (95% CI 0.74–0.82), outperforming the APACHE II score (AUC 0.69, p = 0.02). Conclusions: In critically ill patients with septic shock undergoing CRRT, peak lactate within 24 h was a strong, independent predictor of 28-day mortality. pLac-24h offers a pragmatic, readily available prognostic indicator when serial lactate measurements are unavailable, supporting its integration into bedside risk assessment in real-world Asian ICU practice.

Introduction. Acute tonsillitis is among the most common infectious diseases of the upper respiratory tract. Peritonsillar abscess, being the most frequent purulent complication, remains an important clinical problem in modern otorhinolaryngology. In Ukraine, studies on seasonal variations in the incidence of acute tonsillitis and peritonsillar abscess are limited, which complicates the ability to predict epidemic peaks and optimize healthcare resource allocation. Aim. To determine seasonal patterns in the incidence of acute tonsillitis and peritonsillar abscess during 2023-2025 to optimize epidemic peak forecasting and improve the organization of medical care for patients with this pathology. Materials and methods. A retrospective cohort study was conducted at the Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Bogomolets National Medical University, Kyiv, from January 2023 to September 2025. The study included patients with confirmed diagnoses of acute tonsillitis or peritonsillar abscess. Statistical analysis was performed using Python with Pearson‘s chi-square test, Kruskal-Wallis test, Mann-Kendall test, and Spearman‘s correlation analysis. Results. During the observation period, 1,014 cases of acute tonsillitis and 112 cases of peritonsillar abscess were registered. Distinct seasonal fluctuations were identified, with peaks during the winter-spring period (February-March) and minimums during summer months (July-August). The highest tonsillitis incidence was observed in February (47.0±4.4 cases per month). Mean patient age was 27.6±13.4 years for tonsillitis and 33.4±11.2 years for abscess. A strong correlation was found between tonsillitis and peritonsillar abscess incidence (r = 0.82, p &lt; 0.001), with complications accounting for 11.0%. The seasonality coefficient was 3.62 for tonsillitis and 4.38 for abscess (p &lt; 0.001). Stability of seasonal patterns across three years (r = 0.91-0.94, p &lt; 0.001) suggests restoration of normal epidemiological patterns following COVID-19. Conclusions. Pronounced seasonality of acute tonsillitis and peritonsillar abscess was established, with peaks in February-March and minimums in summer. The significant relationship between both pathologies confirms the classical concept of abscess as a complication of tonsillitis. The study findings have practical implications for healthcare resource planning in the region and can be used to forecast periods of increased incidence.

Immediate catheter removal had a lower risk of significant bacteriuria but increased urinary retention, while the 24-hour removal had reduced urinary retention but was fraught with significant bacteriuria. The 6-hour removal had a modest risk for both significant bacteriuria and urinary retention. The 6-hours removal offers a balance and should be a safer option.

Aim: This study aimed to evaluate the loneliness, physical activity, and malnutrition status of older people and determine the relationship between them. Materials and Methods: The data of the cross-sectional study were collected from 204 older people using a questionnaire between May and June 2024. The questionnaire includes questions regarding general information, the mini nutritional assessment short-form (MNA-SF), the loneliness scale of the elderly (LSE), and the physical activity scale for the elderly (PASE). Data analysis was performed using SPSS 24. Results: The mean total LSE score of the older people was 6.8±5.4, the mean total MNA-SF score was 11.8±2.2, and the mean total PASE score was 85±66.9. The LSE scores of those who were single, who lived in a village/district, and who did not graduate from any school (only literate) were higher (p&amp;lt;0.05). The total LSE scores were lower in older people with normal nutritional status compared to those at risk of malnutrition (p&amp;lt;0.05). The total PASE score was positively correlated with the MNA-SF score (r=0.348, p&amp;lt;0.05). There was no correlation between the PASE and LSE scores (r=-0.081, p&amp;gt;0.05). Conclusion: Good nutritional status is associated with less feelings of loneliness and higher levels of physical activity in older people. Interventions to increase social participation in older people and interventions to provide nutrition training for the management of malnutrition should be made. It is also essential to raise awareness among adults in the community to provide physical, financial, and emotional support to their older parents.

The impact of Dexmedetomidine (Dex) use on the prognosis of patients with ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) remains a subject worthy of further investigation. This study seeks to evaluate the association between Dex administration and prognosis in critically ill patients with VAP. We conducted a retrospective cohort study using the MIMIC-IV database, including adults (≥ 18 years) with VAP and ICU stays ≥ 24 h. Patients were divided into the DEX group and the non-DEX group based on Dex administration. The primary endpoint was in-hospital mortality, and the secondary endpoint was 90-day survival rate. We used multivariable logistic regression and propensity score matching (PSM) to adjust for baseline imbalances. Kaplan-Meier analysis assessed survival differences. Stratified analyses evaluated temporal trends (2008-2022), dosage (mcg/kg/h), and infusion duration (hours) to further validate the robustness of the results. This research included a total of 1766 VAP patients (DEX: n = 905; non-DEX: n = 861), Dex was associated with reduced in-hospital mortality (unadjusted OR 0.55, 95% CI 0.44-0.69; adjusted OR 0.62, 95% CI 0.47-0.83).The survival curve was calculated based on Kaplan-Meier analysis, which indicated that the DEX group exhibited a relatively longer survival time, and this difference was highly statistically significant (p < 0.001).It is worth mentioning that the mortality reduction remained robust across all sensitivity analyses, including PSM, temporal stratification, and dose-duration subgroups. Dex is associated with significantly lower in-hospital mortality in VAP patients.

This randomized controlled trial evaluated the effects of a digital diabetes clinic continuous support program on metabolic, psychological, and social outcomes in individuals with type 2 diabetes who were recently initiated on insulin therapy. The study included 67 participants, with 35 in the intervention group and 32 in the control group. Data were collected at baseline, and at the third and sixth months using various instruments, including the Diabetes Individual Diagnosis Form, Hypoglycemic Confidence Scale (HCS), Hypoglycemia Fear Survey (HFS), Diabetes Empowerment Scale–Short Form (DES-SF), Psychological Insulin Resistance Scale (PIRS), Insulin Treatment Assessment Scale (ITAS), Perceived Social Support Scale (PSSS), and the Visual Analog Scale (VAS) for stress. The intervention group received digital education, counseling, continuous follow-up, and a structured daily self-management program over a 3-month period. 99% CIs were calculated for key outcome measures to support the interpretation and robustness of the results. The findings revealed significant improvements in the intervention group, including reductions in the frequency of hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia, emergency admissions, HbA1c, and lipid levels ( P &lt;.001). Furthermore, hypoglycemia fear and psychological insulin resistance decreased, while hypoglycemic confidence, diabetes empowerment, perceived social support, and stress levels significantly improved ( P &lt;.001). These results demonstrate that digital support programs delivered through a digital diabetes clinic can enhance treatment adherence, reduce anxiety, and improve self-management in individuals newly started on insulin, highlighting the effectiveness of telehealth in diabetes care. Newly initiated on insulin therapy, underscoring the potential of telehealth in diabetes care.

Background: Contraceptive decision making refers to the ability of a women freely choose the contraceptive method they desired through the process of informed decision-making by effectively minimizing unnecessary pressure from important others. Women’s autonomy is often constrained by gender power imbalances and sociocultural norms. In Kerala, despite better educational and economic status, limited evidence suggests these advantages enhance their decision-making regarding contraception. Methods: A community-based mixed-methods study was conducted in Thrissur and Thiruvananthapuram districts in Kerala. Multistage cluster sampling was employed in both the districts to get a total sample of 330 for the quantitative component. Bivariate and multivariable logistic regression were done to estimate the proportion and associated factors. Additionally, 19 in-depth interviews were conducted using purposive sampling to explore decision-making dynamics. Results: Only 18.2% of women reported making contraceptive decisions independently. Employed women (APR: 2.94, 95% CI: 1.84–4.71, p&lt;0.001) and women with both male and female children were more likely to decide independently (APR: 2.80, 95% CI: 1.46–5.30, p=0.002). Qualitative findings highlighted decision-making process among couples are often hindered due to couples’ limited knowledge, misconceptions and fear of side effects. Conclusions: In Kerala, independent contraceptive decision-making among women remains relatively low. Limited knowledge hindered women’s ability to negotiate contraceptive use with their partners, often conform to prevailing social norms. Thus, interventions and policies should focus on raising awareness along with empowering women through financial independence and addressing deep-rooted social and gender norms.

Background Food insecurity involves the lack of physical and economic access to sufficient, safe, and nutritious food that meets an individual’s dietary needs. Patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) undergoing hemodialysis have specific dietary needs, but food insecurity may hinder them from adhering to prescribed guidelines and preserving their nutritional status. However, no research has been conducted to elucidate food insecurity among patients undergoing hemodialysis in Malaysia. Objective This study aimed to assess the prevalence of food insecurity, its determinants, and its association with nutritional status and explore the coping strategies used among patients undergoing hemodialysis in Pahang, Malaysia. Methods This was a cross-sectional study that followed a mixed methods approach and was conducted with patients undergoing hemodialysis for ESRD at the Pahang Islamic Religious Council and Malay Customs (Majlis Ugama Islam dan Adat Resam Melayu Pahang [MUIP]) dialysis centers. The inclusion criteria were patients who were aged 18 years or older, were generally healthy, and had been undergoing hemodialysis regularly for at least 3 months. The food security status of the participants was determined using the Malay version of the Food Insecurity Experience Scale (M-FIES). The nutritional status included anthropometric measurements (height, weight, BMI, triceps skinfold [TSF] thickness, mid-upper arm circumference (MUAC), midarm muscle circumference (MAMC), and body fat percentage), biochemical parameters (serum urea, creatinine, albumin, phosphate, potassium, hemoglobin, and total iron-binding capacity [TIBC]), clinical assessments (Malnutrition Inflammation Score [MIS] and protein energy wasting [PEW]), and dietary intake (adherence to total calorie, protein, sodium, potassium, and phosphorus intake and diet monotony index [DMI]). The determinants were identified using logistic regression, while the association between food security status and nutritional status was analyzed using the chi-square or Fisher’s exact test and the independent t test. Semistructured interviews involved participants who were categorized as mildly, moderately, or severely food insecure in order to explore the contributing factors of food insecurity and how they coped with it based on their lived experience. The interviews were carried out until the data reached saturation, and then the data were analyzed thematically. Results The study was funded by the Ministry of Higher Education Malaysia under the Fundamental Research Grant Scheme (FRGS/1/2023/SS10/UIAM/02/1) starting in September 2023. Data collection was conducted from December 2023 until August 2024, involving 287 participants, and data analysis has also been completed. As of January 2026, quantitative findings are under review and qualitative findings are being prepared. Conclusions The implementation of this study protocol will provide new evidence to improve the understanding of food insecurity in this population. Elucidation of its key contributing factors, coping strategies, and potential connections to nutritional status in this population can help guide more informed policymaking and effective interventions. International Registered Report Identifier (IRRID) RR1-10.2196/84575

Dán artihkkalis guorahalan sámi ja inuihta realisttalaš nuoraidrománaid queer intersekšuvnnalaš representašuvnna ja identitehtagieđahallama nuorra sámi árvvoštalliid vuostáiváldimiin. Dát temáhtalaš guorahallan ovdanbuktá mo realisma doaibmá girjjálašvuođa gaskaoapmin, ja mo dat boktala lohkki beroštumi queer-áššiide. Teoriijan lea eamiálbmogiid ja sámi intersekšuvnnalaš queer-dutkan ja realisttalaš nuoraidrománaid girjjálaš iešvuođaid dutkan. Š-nuoraidmagasiinna, Girjemiela ja Tjállegoađi árvvoštallit buktet románaid queer váldopersovnnaid vásáhusaid servodatdássái románain Ihpil – Láhppon mánáid bestejeaddji (Skåden 2008), Himlabrand (Åstot 2021) ja Homo Sapienne (Korneliussen 2018 (2014)). Árvvoštalliid vuostáiváldin lea čielga dekoloniála proseassa mas čuvgehit intersekšuvnna gaskal dan ahte leat eamiálbmot ja queer.

Introduction: Several studies have been conducted in the field of education for older adults, with an emphasis on teaching and learning processes related to the use of digital technologies. Among the relevant aspects to be considered in this context is the cognitive vulnerability of this age group in terms of digital security. Objective: The aim of this study was to analyze the relationship between cognitive aspects of older adults and their ability to identify digital risks, before and after participating in an educational intervention, as well as the effect of the intervention on cognition in this age group. Methodology: Analyses were conducted according to the educational intervention and control groups, further stratified by digital risk (SJT) and dementia risk, according to the ACE-R test. The Mann–Whitney test was used to identify possible differences in the likelihood of falling for digital scams, considering the dimensions generated by the simulations (SJT). Results: Overall, the educational intervention was effective for the media education dimension (delta −0.5), regardless of dementia risk. More specifically, a particular effect was observed in the post-intervention stage. Conclusions: The educational intervention was able to promote cognitive gains and reduce digital risks among older adults, particularly in the identification of misinformation, underscoring the importance of continuous and adapted programs to promote digital security in this population.

Mazkur maqolada shahar aholisi orasida yuzaga kelayotgan maʼnaviy muammolar, ularning ijtimoiy va falsafiy ildizlari tahlil qilinadi. Muallif urbanizatsiya, individualizm va globallashuv jarayonlarining inson ruhiyati hamda jamiyatdagi qadriyatlar tizimiga koʻrsatgan taʼsirini ochib beradi. Shahar hayoti insonlar oʻrtasidagi ijtimoiy aloqalarning qisqarishi, manfaatparastlik, oʻzaro hurmat va oilaviy qadriyatlarning zaiflashishiga sabab boʻlayotgani qayd etiladi. Maqolada Oʻzbekiston jamiyatidagi oilaviy barqarorlik, milliy qadriyatlarni asrash hamda maʼnaviy muhitni mustahkamlash zarurati ilmiy asosda yoritilgan. Muallif shahar hayotida maʼnaviy muvozanatni tiklash uchun din, milliy anʼana va insoniy qadriyatlarga tayanish lozimligi haqida takliflar beradi.

Ultrasound imaging is widely used owing to its affordability, radiation-free, and non-invasive advantages. However, limitations stemming from operator dependence and artifacts have been noted. To address these issues, deep learning (DL) is increasingly being introduced. In oncology and cardiology, DL-equipped devices are transitioning to clinical use following approval. Nevertheless, DL faces challenges such as generalization, safety, and operational burden, making strategic implementation essential to maximize patient benefit. Existing reviews often list individual technologies but lack evaluation frameworks tailored to clinical implementation. Therefore, this review (i) organizes and formalizes limitations specific to ultrasound diagnosis, (ii) explains the latest DL methods addressing these limitations in terms of principles, implementation, and evaluation metrics, and (iii) examines recent clinical applications, including approved devices, supported by evidence, demonstrating that DL possesses substantial utility beyond the research stage for improving clinical workflows. It also critically evaluates remaining challenges, presents evaluation criteria to aid implementation, and identifies future research challenges.

Wśród źródeł przychodów ustawodawca w art. 10 ust. 1 pkt 8 PDOF wymienił m.in. odpłatne zbycie nieruchomości lub ich części oraz udziału w nieruchomości, jeżeli odpłatne zbycie nie następuje w wykonaniu działalności gospodarczej i zostało dokonane przed upływem pięciu lat, licząc od końca roku kalendarzowego, w którym nastąpiło nabycie lub wybudowanie nieruchomości. Art. 10 ust. 1 pkt 8 PDOF ma w swoim założeniu przeciwdziałać zachowaniom o charakterze spekulacyjnym. Stosownie bowiem do przepisu art. 21 ust. 1 pkt 131 PDOF wolne od podatku dochodowego są dochody z odpłatnego zbycia nieruchomości i praw majątkowych, o których mowa w art. 30e PDOF, jeżeli na zasadach określonych w ustawie zostaną przeznaczone na realizację celów mieszkalnych.

ΕΙΣΑΓΩΓΗ: Η αμφοτερόπλευρη νεφρική αγενεσία (ΑΝΑ) αποτελεί μία σπάνια, αλλά ιδιαίτερα σοβαρή συγγενή ανωμαλία, η οποία συνδέεται με υψηλή περιγεννητική θνησιμότητα. Η παρούσα αφηγηματική ανασκόπηση αποσκοπεί στην καταγραφή ενός ολιστικού, οικογενειοκεντρικού πλάνου φροντίδας για νεογνά με ΑΝΑ. ΜΕΘΟΔΟΙ: Η παρούσα αφηγηματική ανασκόπηση βασίστηκε σε αναφορές περιστατικών, ποιοτικές μελέτες, αφηγηματικές ανασκοπήσεις ή ανασκοπήσεις πεδίου, αναλύσεις εννοιών, μελέτες γνώμης ειδικών και προτάσεις καλών πρακτικών, αναδρομικές μελέτες, κλινικές δοκιμές καθώς και παρουσιάσεις θεωρητικών μοντέλων. Οι πηγές εντοπίστηκαν μέσω αναζήτησης σε ηλεκτρονικές βάσεις δεδομένων, όπως οι PubMed, Google Scholar και EBSCO, δημοσιευμένες στην αγγλική και ελληνική γλώσσα για το διάστημα 1994–2025, με χρήση όρων MeSH. Η επιλογή και εξαγωγή των δεδομένων πραγματοποιήθηκε ανεξάρτητα από τρεις συγγραφείς και οι διαφωνίες επιλύθηκαν μέσω συζήτησης με τέταρτο συγγραφέα. Δεν εφαρμόστηκε επίσημη ποιοτική αξιολόγηση των μελετών. ΑΠΟΤΕΛΕΣΜΑΤΑ: Η ανάλυση των μελετών ανέδειξε έξι βασικούς θεματικούς άξονες στη φροντίδα νεογνών με ΑΝΑ: (1) τις δυνατότητες και τους περιορισμούς της ιατρικής παρέμβασης, (2) την ενεργό συμμετοχή των γονέων στη λήψη αποφάσεων, (3) την αντιμετώπιση των ψυχολογικών, συναισθηματικών και κοινωνικών αναγκών, (4) την εξατομικευμένη υποστήριξη βάσει αξιών και πολιτισμικών ιδιαιτεροτήτων, (5) την ενσωμάτωση των αρχών της ανακουφιστικής φροντίδας και (6) την προώθηση μιας ανθρωποκεντρικής προσέγγισης στη φροντίδα. ΣΥΜΠΕΡΑΣΜΑΤΑ: Η αποτελεσματική διαχείριση της ΑΝΑ απαιτεί διεπιστημονική προσέγγιση που συνδυάζει επιστημονική αρτιότητα με ηθική και ενσυναίσθηση. Η ενσωμάτωση οικογενειοκεντρικών, πολιτισμικά ευαίσθητων και ανακουφιστικών πρακτικών αναδεικνύεται ως αναγκαία συνθήκη για την παροχή ολιστικής και ανθρωποκεντρικής φροντίδας σε συνθήκες κλινικής αβεβαιότητας.

Adverse effects of chemotherapeutic agents remain a significant clinical challenge in the management of gastric cancer. Across the literature, discussions of chemotherapy consistently document a range of toxicities, underscoring that even when treatment halts disease progression, it can leave substantial clinical sequelae. Chemotherapy can impact virtually every organ system, producing multiorgan toxicity with meaningful implications for patient quality of life and treatment feasibility. When initiating a new chemotherapy regimen, prior lack of therapeutic benefit is often associated with difficult recovery or inability to tolerate subsequent chemotherapy, thereby constraining future therapeutic options. Given these considerations and the current absence of universally personalized treatment, a multidisciplinary team—comprising a medical oncologist, gastroenterologist, and internist—is essential to the planning and execution of chemotherapy regimens. We recommend that these chemotherapy regimens be administered within internal medicine departments, in collaboration with the medical oncologist and gastroenterologist, because in many cases the adverse effects outweigh the potential benefits of chemotherapy.

12. yüzyılın önemli düşünürlerinden Şerefüddin el-Mes’ûdî, kendi çağındaki Müslümanların düşünsel problemlerine bilimsel yöntemlerle cevap arayan, sahip olduğu kelamî perspektifi felsefi yöntemle sentezleyen, İslam düşünce tarihinin önemli bir simasıdır. Gazzâlî’den miras aldığı eleştiri tarzını felsefî bakış açısıyla derinleştirerek bir üst seviyeye taşımış ve bu sayede Gazzâlî’den Râzî’ye doğru gelişerek ve dönüşerek yol alan eleştiri zincirinin önemli bir halkası olmuştur. Bu çalışma, Mes’ûdî’nin hayatını, entelektüel çevresini, İbn Sînâ eleştirisini, kendi felsefesini, şerh yöntemini ve eserlerini konu edinmektedir. Bu makalenin amacı, yazmış olduğu İşârât ve Hutbe şerhinden yola çıkarak Mes'ûdî’nin İbn Sîna eleştirisini incelemek ve değerlendirmek; döneminde nasıl bir ilmî konuma sahip olduğunu belirlemek; hayatına, eserlerine, etkilerine dair bilgilere ulaşmak ve en önemlisi felsefesini anlayabilmek ve kendi bağlamı içerisinde doğru konumlandırarak anlatabilmektir. Mes'ûdî, İbn Sînâ felsefesine karşı değildir ve eleştirilerinin amacı İbn Sînâ’nın otoritesini yıkmak değildir. Bu yüzden onun eleştirilerini, meselelerin hakikatine dair tartışmalar olarak okumak gerekir. Tıp, matematik, mantık, meteoroloji, astronomi alanında eserleri olan düşünür, fizik meselelerde İbn Sînâ felsefesini daha kabullenici bir konumda dururken metafizik meselelerde nispeten daha eleştirel bir tavır takınmaktadır. Özellikle âlemin ezelîliği, illet-malul birlikteliği gibi Tanrı-âlem ilişkisine dair konularda kelamî bakış açısına sahiptir. Bunun yanı sıra kullandığı yöntem burhanî, felsefî akıl yürütme yöntemidir.

Taekwondo, yüksek enerji gereksinimi, hızlı reaksiyon, çeviklik, kuvvet gibi çok boyutlu fiziksel kapasite unsurlarını içeren bir dövüş sporudur. Sporcu beslenmesi ise, atletik performansın korunması, geliştirilmesi ve antrenman yüküne uyum sağlanması açısından kritik öneme sahiptir. Taekwondo sporcularının beslenme alışkanlıkları, güç üretimi, dayanıklılık, toparlanma süreci ve genel performans düzeyleri üzerinde doğrudan etkili olabilmektedir. Bu nedenle taekwondo ve beslenme ilişkisinin nicel olarak incelenmesi, spor bilimleri alanında giderek daha fazla ilgi çekmektedir. Bu çalışmanın amacı, ulusal ve uluslararası veri tabanlarında yayımlanan ve taekwondo sporcularında beslenme ile performans ve sağlık göstergeleri arasındaki ilişkiyi inceleyen çalışmaların meta analiz yöntemiyle değerlendirilmesidir. Meta analize dâhil edilme kriterlerini karşılayan ve Pearson korelasyon katsayısını (r) raporlayan 9 çalışma araştırma kapsamına alınmıştır. Yayın yanlılığının değerlendirilmesi amacıyla huni saçılım grafiği, Classic Fail-Safe N, Kendall’s Tau ve Egger regresyon testleri uygulanmış olup, sonuçlarda yayın yanlılığına dair herhangi bir bulguya rastlanmamıştır. Etki büyüklüğünün hesaplanmasında rastgele etkiler modeli kullanılmıştır. Analiz sonucunda taekwondo ve beslenme arasındaki ilişkinin anlamlı olduğu ve etki büyüklüğünün 0.509 değeri ile güçlü düzeyde ve pozitif yönlü bir ilişkiye işaret ettiği belirlenmiştir.

Objective: Diabetic distal symmetric polyneuropathy (DSPN) is a common complication of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) that requires accurate and reliable diagnostic approaches. Existing diagnostic criteria lack sufficient specificity, creating the need for the development of a novel electrodiagnostic protocol. This study aimed to validate the clinical utility of this protocol.Methods: A retrospective analysis was performed in 220 patients with T2DM who were referred for DSPN screening. Nerve conduction studies (NCS) parameters, including compound muscle action potential (CMAP) of the tibial and peroneal nerves, sensory nerve action potential (SNAP) of the sural nerve, and F-waves, were systematically reviewed. Electrodiagnostic findings were correlated with neuropathic symptoms, duration of diabetes, and glycated hemoglobin levels.Results: Based on NCS findings, patients were stratified into normal, early, mild, moderate, and severe DSPN groups. Significant associations were identified between DSPN severity, symptom burden, and specific electrophysiological parameters, particularly tibial CMAP and sural SNAP amplitudes. The protocol enabled structured disease categorization and demonstrated strong diagnostic applicability across the full spectrum of DSPN severity.Conclusion: The proposed electrodiagnostic protocol provides a systematic and efficient approach for diagnosing DSPN in patients with T2DM. It highlights the diagnostic relevance of selected NCS parameters in relation to clinical symptomatology. Further prospective validation in larger and more diverse populations is warranted.

Background: This study aims to systematically map the thematic evolution of temporomandibular joint (TMJ) research from 2000 to 2025, identifying shifts in clinical and methodological priorities using transformer-based topic modeling. Material and Method: A total of 18,107 TMJ-related publications were retrieved from the Scopus database. Titles and abstracts were embedded using a biomedical transformer model. Dimensionality reduction was performed via UMAP, followed by clustering with HDBSCAN. Topics were labeled using class-based TF–IDF. Annual topic proportions were analyzed using ordinary least squares regression with false discovery rate correction. Results: Twenty-seven distinct topics were identified across six domains: biomechanics, clinical symptoms, imaging, pathology, surgery, and therapies. Eleven topics showed significant upward trends, notably arthrocentesis, ankylosis, and mouth-opening interventions. Six topics declined, including disc-focused MRI metrics and elastography. Ten topics remained stable. The findings reveal a thematic shift from biomechanical and imaging metrics toward minimally invasive interventions and digital health applications. Conclusion: Transformer-based topic modeling offers a panoramic view of TMJ research trends, highlighting a growing focus on patient-centered, conservative, and technology-assisted care. These insights provide a framework for future research prioritization and underscore the need for interdisciplinary approaches.

ABSTRACT Aim To assess public awareness, perceptions, and educational intentions regarding Clinical Nurse Specialist (CNS) and Physician Associate (PA) roles in Israel, and to identify predictors of interest in these career pathways. Background Amid physician shortages, countries are promoting advanced roles such as CNSs and PAs to strengthen healthcare capacity. In Israel, both roles are relatively new and underrecognized. Methods A cross‐sectional survey of 200 adults in Israel used descriptive statistics to assess familiarity and interest in CNS and PA roles. Two multiple linear regression models identified predictors of interest in pursuing each role's educational pathway. Findings Awareness of advanced roles was limited: 25.5% and 21% reported familiarity with CNSs and PAs, respectively. Despite this, 26.5% expressed interest in the CNS pathway and 17% in the PA pathway. Women were more likely to favor the CNS role; men showed greater interest in the PA role. Self‐efficacy, career motivation, and gender predicted CNS interest ( R 2 = 0.332). PA interest was predicted by academic background and gender ( R 2 = 0.256), but not by self‐efficacy or motivation. Discussion These findings highlight the need to clarify role definitions, address gendered perceptions, and implement targeted outreach. Differences in predictors suggest that CNS and PA roles appeal to distinct motivational and cognitive profiles. Conclusion Despite low awareness, there is substantial public interest in CNS and PA roles. Tailored educational and communication strategies are needed to increase understanding and engagement. Implications for Nursing Nurses should use clinical encounters to explain CNS and PA roles and build trust. Implications for Health Policy Policymakers should support awareness campaigns, training incentives, and curricular integration to promote role legitimacy and address global workforce challenges.

[This corrects the article DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0336190.].

Pulmonary Tuberculosis (PTB) remains a serious infectious disease and a major global public health problem. Accurate prediction of PTB epidemics is essential to support health authorities in developing effective prevention and control strategies. This study proposed a novel two-stage hybrid prediction model that integrates a seasonal autoregressive integrated moving average (SARIMA) model and a support vector regression (SVR) model in parallel, followed in series by an extreme learning machine (ELM) optimized via the sparrow search algorithm. Furthermore, recognizing the notable spatial correlation characteristic of airborne PTB transmission, this study incorporates PTB incidence data from surrounding regions of the target area as additional input features to enhance the model with supplementary spatial information, thereby improving prediction accuracy. Validation using real-world PTB incidence data from Chongqing, China, demonstrates the superior performance of the proposed model, which reduces prediction errors by 18.47% to 77.38% compared to existing hybrid models. The inclusion of adjacent regional incidence data further significantly enhances predictive accuracy, reducing errors by 20.92% to 68.74%. The outcomes of this study are expected to facilitate earlier insights into PTB incidence trends and provide valuable support for public health decision-making in PTB prevention and control.

Üniversitelerin sürdürülebilir kalkınma hedeflerine katkısını ortaya koyabilmek amacıyla Bursa Uludağ Üniversitesi örneği üzerinden yapılan bu çalışmada; Akademik Veri Yönetim Sistemi üzerinden 24 Haziran 2024 tarihine kadar yayınlanan çalışmalar değerlendirilmiştir. 18.199 yayın 17 Sürdürülebilir Kalkınma Hedefi (SKH) baz alınarak incelenmiştir. Ardından coğrafya disiplininin katkısı ortaya konulmuştur. Coğrafyanın interdisipliner ve multidisipliner yapısı sürdürülebilirlik ile doğal bir bağ meydana getirmiştir. Bilim alanının bütüncül yaklaşımı bu bağı oluşturmuştur. Coğrafyanın 17 SKH’ye katkı sunduğu ancak bu katkı düzeyinin değişkenlik gösterdiği tespit edilmiştir. Çoğunlukla çalışmalar iklim eylemi, karasal yaşam, sürdürülebilir şehirler ve topluluklar başlıkları altında değerlendirilmiştir. Akademik katkı düzeyinin izlenmesinin dışında üniversite bünyesinde çeşitli projelerle sürdürülebilirlik gündeminin desteklendiği ifade edilmiştir. Sürdürülebilirlik konularını araştırma ve eğitim süreçlerine entegre ederek, düşünmeyi teşvik ederek öğrencilerin karmaşık sorunları çözme becerilerini geliştirmelerini destekleyerek sürece katkıda bulunulmaktadır.

We examined the clinical course and risk factors for late onset neurotoxicities, including nerve palsies (IEC-NP) and parkinsonism (IEC-PKS), in patients with relapsed/refractory multiple myeloma (RRMM) treated with ciltacabtagene autoleucel (cilta-cel) in standard-of-care practice (SOC). Among 235 RRMM patients who received cilta-cel, 15 (6.4%) developed IEC-NP and 9 (3.8%) developed IEC-PKS with one patient developing both. Pre-infusion, patients with age >75 years, bone marrow plasma cells ≥20%, or involved free light chain ≥20 mg/dL had increased odds of IEC-PKS. Post-infusion, patients who developed ICANS, received higher cumulative steroid doses or received >1 dose of tocilizumab also had increased odds of IEC-PKS. High peak absolute lymphocyte count (ALCpeak) was a statistically significant predictor on univariate and multivariate analysis for IEC-NP and IEC-PKS. ALC<sub>peak</sub> ≥ 3 × 10<sup>9</sup>/L was identified as a meaningful threshold (AUC = 0.838) to predict for late onset neurotoxicity. An ALC<sub>peak</sub> ≥ 3 × 10<sup>9</sup>/L conferred a positive predictive value for delayed neurotoxicity of 31% vs a negative predictive value of 98% in patients with ALC<sub>peak</sub> < 3 × 10<sup>9</sup>/L. All IEC-NP patients received steroid +/- IVIG; 87% had complete resolution of their cranial neuropathies (median 57 days). Four patients with IEC-PKS received cyclophosphamide (1.5-2 g/m<sup>2</sup>) within 1-13 days of symptom onset and all had observable symptom improvement within 1-2 days.

BACKGROUND Ischemic stroke is one of the leading global causes of disability and death. Despite advances in modern medical technology that improve acute treatment and rehabilitation measures, post-stroke anxiety and depression (PSD) do not receive sufficient attention. AIM To systematically evaluate risk factors and early identification markers for PSD for more precise screening and intervention strategies in clinical practice. METHODS This retrospective study analyzed clinical data from 112 patients with ischemic stroke admitted between January 2022 and December 2024. Based on assessments using the Hamilton Rating Scale for Anxiety (HAMA) and Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HAMD) at 2 weeks (± 3 days) post-stroke, patients were classified into the PSD group (HAMA ≥ 7 and/or HAMD ≥ 7) and the non-PSD group (HAMA &lt; 7 and HAMD &lt; 7). Observation indicators included psychological assessment, demographic and clinical characteristics, stroke-related clinical indicators, neuroimaging assessments, and laboratory biomarkers. Multivariate logistic regression analysis was used to identify independent risk factors for PSD, and receiver operating characteristic curve analysis was used to evaluate the diagnostic value of potential biomarkers. RESULTS Of the 112 patients, 46 (41.1%) were diagnosed with PSD. Multivariate analysis identified five independent risk factors: Female gender [Odds ratio (OR) = 2.32, 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.56-3.45], history of mental disorders prior to stroke (OR = 3.17, 95%CI: 1.89-5.32), infarct location in the frontal lobe or limbic system (OR = 2.86, 95%CI: 1.73-4.71), stroke severity with National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale ≥ 8 at admission (OR = 2.54, 95%CI: 1.62-3.99), and low social support (Social Support Rating Scale &lt; 35, OR = 2.18, 95%CI: 1.42-3.36). Subgroup analysis showed that depression patients more commonly had left hemisphere lesions (68.4% vs 45.2%), while anxiety patients more frequently presented with right hemisphere lesions (59.5% vs 39.5%). The PSD group exhibited larger infarct volumes (8.7 cm3 vs 5.3 cm3), more severe white matter hyperintensities, and more pronounced frontal lobe atrophy. Analysis of inflammatory markers showed significantly elevated levels of interleukin-6 (7.8 pg/mL vs 4.5 pg/mL) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (15.6 pg/mL vs 9.8 pg/mL) in the PSD group, while hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis function assessment revealed higher cortisol levels (386.5 ± 92.3 nmol/L vs 328.7 ± 75.6 nmol/L) and flattened diurnal rhythm in the PSD group. CONCLUSION PSD is a complex neuropsychiatric consequence of stroke involving disruption of the frontal-limbic circuitry, neuroinflammatory responses, and dysfunction of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis.

&lt;p&gt;Investigator response assessment of non-irradiated lesions, per modified itRECIST&lt;/p&gt;

Objective: The relationship between depression, excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS), and obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome (OSAS) has been investigated in various studies, but this relationship remains unclear. In this study, depression scores in patients undergoing polysomnography (PSG) for suspected OSAS were evaluated, and the relationship between daytime sleepiness and these conditions was investigated. Method: A total of 103 patients (71 men, 30 women) aged 18–75 years who underwent PSG were retrospectively evaluated. Comorbidities, body mass index (BMI), Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS), and Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) data were analysed. Patients with psychiatric disorders were excluded. Results: Mild OSAS was found in 29 patients, moderate OSAS in 24 patients, and severe OSAS in 42 patients. According to the BDI, 69 patients had scores consistent with depression, while 32 patients were considered non-depressed. Patients with ESS scores above 10 were considered to have excessive daytime sleepiness. No significant relationship was found between AHI and BDI (p=0.390), but a significant relationship was found between AHI and ESS (p=0.005). No significant relationship was observed between ESS and BDI (p=0.301). Conclusion: No direct relationship was observed between excessive daytime sleepiness and depression. It was concluded that the emotional state of patients with OSAS should be evaluated carefully. Further studies with larger samples are needed.

Background: Accurate assessment of illness severity in critically ill patients is essential for effective clinical decision-making in intensive care units (ICUs). Various severity scoring systems, such as Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation (APACHE) II, APACHE IV, Simplified Acute Physiology Score II and III, Mortality Probability Model III (MPM III), Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA), Multiple Organ Dysfunction Score (MODS), and Logistic Organ Dysfunction Score (LODS), have been developed to predict outcomes. However, their comparative performance in resource-limited settings such as Indian tertiary care hospitals remains under-evaluated. Aims and Objectives: This study aims to compare the predictive accuracy of multiple ICU severity scoring systems in terms of mortality and morbidity among patients admitted to the medical ICU (MICU). Materials and Methods: This prospective observational study enrolled 250 adult patients admitted to the MICU of Maharani Laxmi Bai Medical College, Jhansi, for ≥72 h. Severity scores were calculated within 24 h of admission using standard formulas. Outcomes, including mortality, ICU stay, and ventilator requirement, were analyzed using receiver operating characteristic curves, correlation analysis, and logistic regression through Statistical Package for the Social Sciences v21. Results: MPM III (day 3) exhibited the highest predictive accuracy with an area under the curve of 0.88, sensitivity 90.1%, and specificity 84.6%. SOFA, MODS, and LODS also significantly differentiated survivors from non-survivors (P&lt;0.001). Strong correlations were found between higher scores and ICU mortality, ventilator need, and longer ICU stays. Multivariate analysis identified age &gt;60, APACHE II, SOFA, MODS, and MPM III as independent predictors of mortality. Conclusion: MPM III (day 3) is the most reliable severity scoring system for predicting ICU mortality in this setting. APACHE II and SOFA also remain clinically valuable for critical care prognostication.

Mazkur maqolada tasavvuf taʼlimotining shakllanishi va rivojlanishida muhim ahamiyat kasb etgan gʻoyaviy va manbaviy asoslar tahlil qilinadi. Xususan, Qurʼoni Karim va hadislarning tasavvufdagi oʻrni, ilmi laduniy, zikr, tavba, zuhd, tavakkul hamda riyozat kabi tushunchalarning maʼnaviy-axloqiy mohiyati yoritib beriladi. Shuningdek, Paygʻambar Muhammad (s.a.v.) va sahobalarning hayot tarzi tasavvufiy kamolot mezoni sifatida talqin qilinadi. Muallif tasavvufni islom dinining ajralmas qismi sifatida asoslab, uning insonni ruhiy poklanish va komillikka yetaklovchi taʼlimot ekanini ilmiy jihatdan asoslaydi.

Background: Nebulized polymyxin B (PMB) therapy is widely used in intensive care units for treating hospital-acquired and ventilator-associated pneumonia caused by multidrug-resistant Gram-negative bacteria, yet its pulmonary delivery performance during invasive mechanical ventilation remains poorly characterized. Methods: An in vitro adult mechanical ventilation model was used. We evaluated two nebulizers (vibrating mesh nebulizer [VMN] and jet nebulizer [JN]) at three positions (standalone nebulizer, 15 cm from the Y-piece, and the humidifier’s dry end) with two artificial airway types (endotracheal and tracheostomy tubes). Lung deposition was predicted using the multiple-path particle dosimetry model, incorporating the Yeh/Schum five-lobe adult lung model. Results: In the standalone setup, the percentage of delivered dose of VMN and JN was approximately 40% and 34%, respectively. Mechanical ventilation significantly reduced the delivered dose (all p ≤ 0.0085), with VMN at the humidifier’s dry end delivering only 2.14–2.99% of the nominal dose. In all the tested ventilation scenarios, both the use of the JN and positioning the nebulizer 15 cm from the Y-piece significantly increased aerosol delivery (all p ≤ 0.021). While the ventilator circuit reduced the total drug amount, it filtered larger aerosols. This resulted in a smaller mass median aerodynamic diameter and a higher fine particle fraction (all p &lt; 0.0001), which doubled the predicted alveolar deposition fraction (from 13–14% in standalone to 23–28% in ventilation scenarios) and eliminated extrathoracic deposition. Conclusions: This study provides the first in vitro and in silico assessment of PMB aerosol delivery during invasive mechanical ventilation. Nebulizer type, its placement within the circuit, and the artificial airway are critical factors that significantly alter the pulmonary delivery of PMB aerosol and subsequently impact its lung deposition.

OBJECTIVES Early data suggested higher sedative requirements for ventilated COVID+ patients, deviating from established guidelines. We assessed the relationship between sedative use and outcomes in mechanically ventilated Veterans during the COVID-19 pandemic. Design Retrospective Medication Use Evaluation Setting National Sample of 13 Distinct VA Medical Center Intensive Care Units Patients Critically ill Veteran patients requiring mechanically ventilation for ≥2 days Interventions None. Measurements and main results The proportion of patients receiving fentanyl, midazolam and propofol was higher during COVID years. Compared with pre-COVID, median fentanyl dose was higher during Years 1 and 2 (1575mcg [(IQR) 1000–1650] vs. 1900 [1250–3000] vs. 1910 [1150–3500]). Adjuvant antipsychotics use was relatively low but tended to increase over time (pre = 10.5% vs. Year 1 = 12.3% vs. Year 2 = 14.1%). Most patients started on antipsychotics in the ICU were continued on the drug after extubation. Mortality was higher during COVID years (pre = 26.9% vs. 1 = 36.8% and 2 = 35.9%). In stratified analyses by COVID status years 1–2 (n = 79, 27%), a higher proportion of COVID+ patients received fentanyl (96% vs. 84%) and propofol (90% vs. 77%) and at higher doses (fentanyl = 1650mcg vs. 2688mcg median cumulative dose; propofol maximum infusion rate = 30 mc/kg/min (20–50) vs. 40 (25–50)). Sedative doses were similar to pre-COVID among non-COVID patients. Anti-psychotics were more frequently continued post extubation among COVID+ (34.6% vs. non-COVID+=14.9%). COVID+ patients were also less likely to have awakening and breathing trials at 48 hours after intubation (18% vs. 46%). Conclusions Sedative use and dosing increased during the first two years of COVID compared to pre-COVID, especially for COVID+ patients. The sustained elevated levels of fentanyl use in Year 2 suggests possible ‘therapeutic creep’ away from guideline-concordant practices for COVID+ patients. Antipsychotic prescription during intubation and following extubation was also more common among COVID + . These findings could inform development and implementation of safer sedation practices across VA ICUs during respiratory pandemics.

This quality improvement project aimed to transition a traditional full-day nurse competency format to a flexible, just-in-time training model. Staff feedback of the just-in-time model indicated increased satisfaction as well as greater accessibility. In addition, the leadership found gain in this approach as there was a positive financial impact. This has specific benefits for nurse professional development practitioners as it offers a more efficient and flexible method for delivering competency training, while enhancing staff satisfaction.

Abstract Stimulation of sensory vagal pathways is typically delivered via invasive, cervical vagus nerve stimulation (cVNS) or noninvasive, trans-auricular nerve stimulation (taNS). While both methods are investigated therapeutically, their effects on brain physiology remain poorly understood, hindering mechanistic understanding and stimulus optimization. In 6 awake nonhuman primates, we recorded cortical vagal-evoked potentials (VEPs) from subdural electrodes placed in prefrontal, sensorimotor and parietal cortical areas, in response to cVNS or taNS. Across 478 different taNS and cVNS protocols, we varied stimulation side, intensity, frequency, pulse count, and pulse width (PW) and assessed independent effects on amplitude and latency of early (EC; 30-100 ms), intermediate (IC; 101-200 ms) and late components (LC; 201-500 ms) of VEPs. Fixed and random effects of stimulation parameters and subjects, respectively, on VEP measurements, were assessed using a linear mixed-effects model. Overall, cVNS elicits more robust VEPs than taNS, with larger EC, IC and LC amplitudes in both hemispheres. cVNS-elicited ECs and LCs are largest in PFC and PC areas, whereas ICs are largest in SM areas. On the other hand, taNS generally does not elicit area-specific responses. cVNS-elicited ECs have slower latency than ta-NS elicited ECs. Higher stimulation frequencies and intensities and a longer pulse width elicit larger ECs and ICs for cVNS, and to some extent for taNS. Both short and long cVNS trains elicit stronger ECs, and long trains elicit slower ICs. Earlobe stimulation elicits VEPs that partially overlap with those from taNS. In conclusion, cVNS and taNS elicit cortical VEPs in a manner consistent with distinct engagement of ascending vagal pathways, and with similarities and differences in the effects of stimulation parameters on evoked responses.

Miscarriage is frequently associated with significant distress, yet evidence certainty varies regarding recurrence and intervention effectiveness. Findings highlight a persistent gap between women's mental health needs and healthcare responses.

<title>Abstract</title> Background: Lung cancer (LC) and arrhythmias frequently coexist, posing significant challenges in clinical management. The interplay between these conditions can exacerbate hemodynamic instability and influence treatment outcomes. This study aimed to assess the impact of arrhythmias on mortality and disparities in patients with LC. Methods: We analyzed death certificates of adults aged &gt; 25 years from the CDC-WONDER database with LC (ICD-10 codes: C34) and arrhythmias (ICD-10 codes: I44, I45, I47, I48, and I49) from to 1999–2023. Age-adjusted mortality rates (AAMR) per 100,000 population were stratified by gender, race, census region, and year. Join-point analysis was performed to estimate the annual percent change (APC) and average annual percent change (AAPC) in mortality trends. Results: Between 1999 and 2023, LC and arrhythmias caused 132,085 deaths in adults aged &gt; 25 years. The AAMR first increased from 18.98 in 1999 to 25.06 in 2018 (APC: 1.32, 95% CI: 1.18–1.46), further increased to 30.4 in 2021 (APC: 7.13; 95% CI: 5.53–8.05) and finally decreased to 29.98 in 2023 (APC: -0.61; 95% CI: -2.31 to 1.20) with an overall AAPC (1.87; 95% CI: 1.74–1.99). The AAMR for males in 2023 (39.09) was higher than that for females (22.86). The AAMR for non-Hispanic (NH) White in 2023 displayed the highest AAMR (34.32), followed by NH Black or African American (25.46), NH American Indian or Alaska Native (21.14), NH Asian or Pacific Islander (12.9), and Hispanic or Latino (11.17). Geographically, the AAMR for the South region in 2023 showed the highest AAMR (33.11), followed by the Midwest (32.13), West (26.25), and Northeast (25.7). From 1999–2020, Rural areas exhibited a higher AAMR (37.3) than urban areas (26.41). Conclusion: LC and arrhythmia-related mortalities have increased, with the highest rates among males, White individuals, and those in the southern and rural regions. These disparities highlight the need for targeted interventions and improvements in clinical care facilities for high-risk populations.

Іntroduction. Safety culture is a certain set of behavioral models that are quite acceptable for today's conditions, which determine the commitment of a healthcare institution to ensuring the principles of adequate patient safety. Aim. To conduct a comparative analysis of safety culture assessment in healthcare institutions and identification of its key components among different categories of healthcare specialists. Materials and methods. The research was conducted with the involvement of practicing physicians and heads of healthcare institutions in Ukraine based on the application of hygienic, medical-sociological, expert assessment, and statistical analysis methods. In addition, the level of safety culture in healthcare institutions necessitated the use of such varieties of the hierarchy method as the group examination method with subsequent ranking and pairwise comparison. Results. In the course of the research, a comparative analysis was conducted to assess the features of evaluating the level of safety culture inherent in healthcare institutions. The study identified its leading components among different categories of specialists, namely among representatives of managerial (managers) and executive (practitioners) staff. These components reflect the degree of influence on the level of safety culture and include: (1) the main characteristics of unsafe human actions, (2) strengths and weaknesses in ensuring the safety of the medical environment, and (3) hazardous occupational factors. A paradigm for the formation of a safety culture in the organization of the labor process in the medical industry was determined and scientifically substantiated. The principles underlying its implementation are the principles of a comprehensive approach, a systemic approach, and a combined approach. Conclusions. During scientific research, a comparative assessment of the features of assessing the level of safety culture in healthcare institutions was conducted, and its leading components were identified among certain categories of specialists — representatives of the management team of healthcare institutions (managers) and representatives of the executive team (practitioners). A paradigm for the formation of a safety culture during the organization of the labor process in the medical industry was defined and scientifically substantiated.

Đặt vấn đề: Lupus ban đỏ hệ thống (SLE) là một bệnh tự miễn phức tạp với biểu hiện lâm sàng đa dạng. Đã có nhiều báo cáo mô tả đặc điểm lâm sàng, cận lâm sàng của SLE tại nước ta, tuy nhiên chưa có nghiên cứu nào đề cập đến nhóm lần đầu được chẩn đoán theo tiêu chuẩn EULAR/ACR 2019. Đối tượng và phương pháp nghiên cứu: Nghiên cứu mô tả cắt ngang trên 37 người bệnh lần đầu tiên được chẩn đoán SLE theo bộ tiêu chí EULAR/ACR 2019 tại Trung tâm Dị ứng Miễn dịch lâm sàng, Bệnh viện Bạch Mai trong thời gian từ tháng 10 năm 2024 đến tháng 8 năm 2025. Kết quả: Nữ giới là đối tượng chủ yếu với tỷ lệ nữ/nam là 5,2/1, nhóm tuổi 20-40 thường gặp nhất. Tổn thương huyết học thường gặp nhất, được ghi nhận ở 94,6% đối tượng nghiên cứu, tổn thương thận xác định ở 62,2% các trường hợp. Kháng thể kháng nhân dương tính ở toàn bộ các trường hợp, trong đó kiểu hình homogeneous thường gặp nhất trên miễn dịch huỳnh quang. Kháng thể kháng chuỗi kép DNA cũng gặp ở 97,3% người bệnh. Xét về mức độ hoạt động bệnh, đối tượng nghiên cứu chủ yếu ở nhóm hoạt động mạnh hoặc rất mạnh. Kết luận: Nhóm người bệnh SLE lần đầu được chẩn đoán tại Trung tâm Dị ứng Miễn dịch lâm sàng Bệnh viện Bạch Mai chủ yếu thuộc nhóm bệnh hoạt động mạnh/rất mạnh và tổn thương huyết học, thận là những biểu hiện lâm sàng thường gặp nhất.

The digitalization of reproductive healthcare—from teleconsultations to electronic medical records and mobile fertility applications—has improved access, efficiency, and continuity of care. However, this transformation has simultaneously introduced significant cybersecurity vulnerabilities that directly threaten the confidentiality, integrity, and reliability of reproductive health services. Because reproductive health information is deeply sensitive, breaches can lead to severe social, psychological, and clinical consequences. This commentary discusses the growing relevance of cybersecurity in reproductive healthcare delivery, outlines key vulnerabilities across digital care pathways, and emphasizes the ethical and governance imperatives for safeguarding reproductive health data. The paper argues that cybersecurity is not merely a technical requirement but an essential component of reproductive healthcare quality and patient protection.

Ushbu maqolada Turkistonda matbaaning vujudga kelishi, keng yoyilishi va rivojlanish jarayonlari batafsil yoritishga harakat qilindi. Maqolada rus mustamlakachilarining matbaani tashkil etishdan koʻzlagan maqsadi, turkistonlik maʼrifatparvarlarning milliy matbaa va matbuotga asos solish yoʻlida turli millat taraqqiyparvarlari bilan hamkorlik aloqalari yoritildi. Matbaachilikning vujudga kelishiga doir yangi maʼlumotlar ilmiy muomalaga kiritildi.

Background: Babesiosis, caused by intraerythrocytic parasites of the genus Babesia, represents an emerging global health threat due to its capacity for persistent infection and transfusion transmission. The ability of Babesia spp. to establish chronic, asymptomatic infections lasting up to two years in immunocompetent hosts creates a substantial reservoir of infectious blood donors, making transfusion-transmitted babesiosis (TTB) a critical blood safety concern. Summary: The epidemiology of babesiosis differs markedly between regions, with B. microti predominating in North America and B. divergens in Europe. In the United States, seroprevalence studies among blood donors reveal rates of 0.38% in endemic regions. In 2019, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) issued non-binding recommendations for year-round regional nucleic acid testing of individual donations in 14 endemic states and Washington DC, or alternatively, the use of FDA-approved pathogen reduction technology for blood components. [1,2] TTB can result in severe clinical complications with mortality rates approaching 20%, particularly affecting immunocompromised recipients. European studies demonstrate significantly lower prevalence rates, with minimal Babesia DNA detection in blood donor populations from Austria [3] and Poland [4], despite serological evidence of exposure. Current detection methods include microscopic examination, nucleic acid amplification, antigen detection, and antibody testing, with screening programs proving effective in endemic regions. Key Messages: Persistent Babesia infections pose a significant threat to blood safety, necessitating region-specific risk assessment and mitigation strategies. The substantial difference in prevalence between North American and European blood donor populations highlights the importance of tailored approaches to screening implementation. Enhanced surveillance, novel therapeutic strategies, and comprehensive prevention measures—including advanced diagnostics, tick-avoidance programs, and pathogen reduction technologies—are essential for minimizing the global health burden of persistent babesiosis and protecting vulnerable populations from this emerging transfusion-transmitted threat.

Objective: To assess the predictive accuracy of the Clinical Risk Index for Babies (CRIB-II) scoring system for mortality in pre-mature babies admitted in neonatal intensive care unit. Study Design: Quasi-experimental. Place and Duration of Study: Department of Pediatrics, Combined Military Hospital, Rawalpindi, Pakistan, from Jan to Jun 2023. Methodology: A total of 280 neonates were assessed for CRIB-II score and predictive mortality. The CRIB-II score was assessed for all participants in the first 30 minutes of admission to NICU which included gender, gestational age, birth weight in grams on an electronic neonatal weight scale and base excess calculated by arterial blood gas analysis in addition to checking rectal temperature. Higher scores were hypothesized to associated with increased mortality. Results: After analyzing the primary variables, median CRIB-II scores between both groups showed values of 15.00 (IQR=3.50) in Group N versus 8.00 (IQR=2.00) in Group S (p&lt;0.001). ROC (Receiver operative characteristics) and AUC (area under the curve) analysis showed AUC was 0.962 (95% CI=0.933-0.990) with the best suitable cut-off for sensitivity and specificity at CRIB-II score of 7.5 consistent with a 98.8% sensitivity and 72.3% specificity for mortality. Conclusion: CRIB-II is an effective scoring system for predicting mortality in NICUs for delivery of effective care.

Background: Primary obstructive megaureter (POM) is not uncommon in our population, and urologists treat it differently depending on their experience and personal preferences. In addition, there is conflicting information in the literature about the endoscopic placement of a double J stent in POM patients. This study will give us a local magnitude comparison of endoscopic implantation of JJ stents with open surgery in treating POM. Methods: The Department of Urology at the Khyber Teaching Hospital Peshawar ran this comparative analytical study from July 2024 to July 2025. The study included 102 patients, 51 in each group, who were between the ages of 1 and 5 years and had primary obstructive mega ureter. We did not include patients with bladder stone, neurogenic bladder and who have received any treatment for POM in the past. While patients in group B underwent open ureteric re-implantation, patients in group A underwent endoscopic double J stent insertion. If the obstruction is removed and the ureteral diameter and hydronephrosis decrease, the procedure was deemed successful. If there were no complications during the eighth week of follow-up, the surgery was deemed safe. Results: In my investigation, the efficacy of endoscopic double J stents and open ureteric surgery re-implantation was 64.71% and 92.16%, respectively, with a p-value of 0.0008. The safety of endoscopic double J stents and open ureteric surgery re-implantation was 80.39% and 96.08%, respectively, with a p-value of 0.014. Conclusion: We came to the conclusion that open ureteric surgery is more effective and safer than endoscopic double J stents for re-implantation of primary obstructive megaureters in preschoolers aged 1 to 5.

Bu makale, İslâm tasavvufundaki nefs-i emmâre ile G. I. Gurdjieff’in Dördüncü Yol öğretisindeki güdüsel merkez kavramlarını karşılaştırmalı bir okuma çerçevesinde incelemektedir. Öncelikle iki geleneğin insanın ilkel ve otomatik eğilimlerini kavramsallaştırma biçimleri ele alınmakta; ardından bu eğilimlerle baş etme yolları ve dönüşümün nihai yönü bakımından ayrışmaları tartışılmaktadır. Tasavvuf geleneğinde nefs-i emmâre, ahlâkî sorumluluk yüklenen ve arındırılması gereken bir mertebe olarak tanımlanır. Bu mertebenin aşılması, riyazet, zikir, murâkabe ve mürşid rehberliği gibi yöntemlerle mümkün görülür. Dördüncü Yol anlayışında ise güdüsel merkez, bedensel ve otomatik işlevlerin nötr odağıdır. Burada amaç, merkezin bastırılması değil; öz-gözlem ve “kendini hatırlama” pratikleriyle doğru konumuna yerleştirilmesidir. Bu yönüyle iki yaklaşım, yüzeyde ortak bir “otomatiklikten uyanış” temasını paylaşsa da dil, maksat ve nihai hedef bakımından ayrışır. Dördüncü Yol, sahte benliklerin pasifize edilmesi yoluyla kişiliğin mekanikliğinin kırılması ile bireyin "gerçek benliğini" veya "özünü" keşfetmesi ve geliştirmesine yönelirken tasavvuf, fenâ-bekâ çizgisinde benliğin ilâhî hakikatte fânî oluşunu esas alır. Bu çalışmada, metin-merkezli ve karşılaştırmalı-kavramsal bir çözümleme yoluyla erken ve klasik dönem sûfî kaynakları, Dördüncü Yol literatürünün temel metinleriyle birlikte ele alınmaktadır. Bulgular, her iki yaklaşımın otomatiklik, dürtüsellik ve bilinç dağınıklığını başlangıç sorunu olarak teşhis ettiğini; dönüşüm araçlarının farklı teorik dayanaklara yaslandığını ve nihai hedeflerin Dördüncü Yol’da ‘gerçek benliğin olgunlaşması’, tasavvufta ise ‘benlikten geçiş (fenâ/bekâ)’ olarak ayrıştığını ortaya koymaktadır. Son kısımda her yol kendi bağlamında ele alınır; tasavvufun ahlâk ve tezkiyeyi önceleyen terbiyesi, Dördüncü Yol’un öz-gözlem ve “kendini hatırlama” çalışmalarıyla yan yana getirilir. Bu yaklaşım, ruhsal olgunlaşmaya dair ortak ve ayrışan yönleri görünür kılar; bugünün arayışları için dengeli bir bakış sunar.

Background: Accurate recording of Controlled Drug (CD) transactions is a key legislative and professional responsibility in Australian hospitals. Following the introduction of ENFit™ enteral systems, designed to reduce wrong-route medication administration errors, discrepancies in oral liquid CD balances continued to be reported. Residual liquid that remained in ENFit™ syringes and multi-dose bottles after the withdrawal process was suggested as a contributing factor. Objective: To estimate the amount of oral liquid loss associated with the use of ENFit™ enteral syringes and bottle adapters, and to explore potential implications for oral liquid CD documentation accuracy. Methods: A laboratory-based simulation study was conducted to model the use of ENFit™ enteral syringes (1, 2.5, 5, and 10 mL) and ENFit™ bottle adapters during repeated withdrawals from 100 mL sample bottles. Simple syrup B.P. was selected for its viscosity comparable to that of oral liquid medications. Syringes and bottles were weighed before and after each withdrawal using a calibrated scale, and the weight of residual liquid was converted to volume using the density of simple syrup (1.27 g/mL). The viscosity of the test liquid was measured and compared with that of two commonly used oral liquid CDs. Results: Across 184 withdrawals, the mean (SD) total volume loss per 100 mL sample was 5.17 mL (0.63), representing a 4.5% to 5.9% discrepancy. Both the number of withdrawals and the syringe size correlated with greater liquid loss. The 10 mL syringes produced the highest loss per withdrawal, while 5 mL syringes produced the largest total loss due to a greater number of withdrawals. Conclusions: This study demonstrated a consistent, measurable loss of oral liquid CD (approximately 5%) when using ENFit™ enteral syringes and adapters, even under controlled conditions and when correct withdrawal technique was used. These losses may contribute to minor but recurring CD discrepancies in clinical practice. Healthcare organizations should consider these findings when developing policies for oral liquid CD handling and balance reconciliation. Strategies like correct device fit, unit-dose packaging, and gravimetric verification may improve accuracy, reduce discrepancy investigations, and enhance CD recording compliance.

<title>Abstract</title> Background Mpox continues to pose a significant re-emerging health threat, especially among key population groups. In Goma, Democratic Republic of Congo, vaccine uptake within these communities has been notably high, despite the obstacles posed by ongoing humanitarian crises and widespread misinformation. This study sought to explore the sociocultural, organizational, and communication factors that contribute to this remarkable level of vaccination adherence. Methods Between September 2024 and January 2025, a cross-sectional study was carried out involving 420 participants from key populations including sex workers, men who have sex with men, transgender persons, and people who inject drugs across the Goma, Karisimbi, and Nyiragongo health zones. Data were gathered using structured questionnaires through proportional purposive sampling. Statistical analyses were performed in STATA and SPSS, applying logistic regression models with significance set at p ≤ 0.05. Results The study found an overall Mpox vaccine uptake of 81% among key populations. Key factors driving adherence included positive social acceptance (OR = 19.85), the influence of peer educators (OR = 42.91), viewing vaccination as a form of social protection (OR = 24.047), and the effect of information received (OR = 8.47). Intriguingly, certain beliefs traditionally deemed irrational such as perceiving Mpox as a community manipulation (OR = 84.9) were unexpectedly linked to higher vaccination rates. Engagement in welcoming health centers (99.7%) and living within 10 km of these facilities (82%) further facilitated uptake. Conversely, fear of side effects (43.8%) and insufficient information (28.7%) continued to hinder vaccination among those not yet immunized. Conclusion In Goma, vaccine adherence is shaped by community interactions, distinct cultural perceptions, and context-specific communication strategies. These findings underscore the importance of incorporating sociocultural approaches to enhance vaccination coverage, particularly in crisis-affected settings.

Abstract Primary cicatricial alopecia of the scalp encompasses neutrophilic, lymphocytic, mixed varieties, of which folliculitis decalvans belongs to the neutrophilic group and lichen planopilaris comes under the lymphocytic group. This is a case series of four patients who presented clinically with folliculitis decalvans and histopathology with overlapping features. Four patients presented with a history of painful scalp pustular lesions and hair loss with no other significant history. A clinical diagnosis of folliculitis decalvans was made, and a biopsy for histopathological examination with vertical and transverse sections was studied. The histopathology of cases revealed features consistent with both folliculitis decalvans and lichen planopilaris. Folliculitis decalvans and lichen planopilaris phenotypic spectrum is an emerging entity with fewer cases reported in the literature.

We studied birth defects in the main tertiary government hospital, Indira Gandhi Memorial Hospital (IGMH) of Maldives from 2016 to 2024. All inborn live births in the 9-year period were included. Still births and miscarriages were excluded. ICD 10 was used for coding. There were 17188 live births, and 729 babies (4.24%) had birth defects described under Q code of ICD-10. A total of 1215 defects were noted. The number of females was 313 (43%) and there were 16 from twin deliveries. 312 defects (26% of all defects) were in preterm babies. Out of 710 mothers who delivered babies with birth defects, 107 (15%) had gestational diabetes. Median birth weight was 2,862 gm (range from 630gm to 5,000gm), and median gestational age was 37.5 weeks (range from 25 to 41 weeks) for neonates with birth defects. Looking at neonatal outcomes, 24 had hypoglycaemia (3.3%), 21 had hypothermia (2.9%), 27 babies died before discharge (3.7%). The most common cause for neonatal deaths with birth defects was lung hypoplasia (total 6 patients, 22% of deaths). Two deaths were due to diaphragmatic hernia and another 2 had Potter’s syndrome. 82 (11.2%) babies required bag and mask ventilation. The overall incidence of total birth defects in our study was 42.4 per 1000 live births. This includes significant and non-significant birth defects under the ICD code Q. The most common were congenital malformations of the circulatory system, which consists of 28.7% of defects with an incidence of 20 per 1000 live births. Birth defects were common in our study. Respiratory system defects were the cause for highest mortality.

Đặt vấn đề: Nghiên cứu đánh giá kết quả phẫu thuật nội soi tái tạo DCCT bảo tồn di tích tại bệnh viện Hữu nghị Việt Đức. Đối tượng và phương pháp nghiên cứu: Nghiên cứu mổ tả cắt ngang hồi cứu không nhóm chứFng trên 52 bệnh nhân đứt DCCT khớp gối được phẫu thuật nội soi tái tạo bảo tồn di tích tại Bệnh viện Hữu nghị Việt Đức từ tháng 8 năm 2024 đến tháng 3 năm 2025. Kết quả: Sau mổ số bệnh nhân có nghiệm pháp Lachman âm tính chiếm 92,3%, nghiệm pháp Pivot Shift âm tính chiếm 94,2%, điểm Lysholm đạt trung bình sau mổ đạt 93,52 và IKDC sau mổ có tỷ lệ tốt và rất tốt chiếm 98%. Kết luận: Phẫu thuật nội soi tái tạo DCCT bảo tồn di tích phục hồi khớp gối vững, chức năng khớp gối tốt.

Abstract Purpose To assess the effect of the knee flexion on the tibial tuberosity–trochlear groove (TT–TG) distance measurement by comparing conventional and whole‐leg rotational magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Methods This retrospective cohort study included 45 patients with patellar dislocations who had undergone both conventional knee MRI with the knee in slight knee flexion (20°–30°) and full‐length rotational MRI in extension (0°–5°). TT–TG distances were determined by two independent observers using standardised landmarks. Measurement reproducibility was evaluated using intraclass correlation coefficients (ICCs) for both intra and interrater reliability (3‐month interval). Results TT–TG distance values derived from conventional MRI were significantly smaller (13.4 ± 4.0 mm, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 12.2–14.6) compared to those from whole‐leg rotational MRI (18.3 ± 4.4 mm [95% CI: 16.9–19.6]), yielding a mean difference of 4.8 ± 3.0 mm (95% CI: 3.9–5.8; p &lt; 0.001). Both interrater (conventional MRI: ICC = 0.946 [95% CI: 0.901 – 0.971]; rotational MRI: ICC = 0.949 [95% CI: 0.899–0.973]) and intrarater reliability (conventional MRI: ICC = 0.995 [95% CI: 0.992–0.997]; rotational MRI: ICC = 0.991 [95% CI: 0.983–0.995]) were excellent across modalities. Conclusion Conventional knee MRIs, performed with knee in slight flexion, are consistently smaller compared to those acquired in full extension whole‐leg rotational MRI. Knee flexion, therefore, leads to a systematic underestimation of the TT–TG distance. Standardising knee position during imaging is essential to ensure accurate and comparable TT–TG assessments. Level of Evidence Level II, cohort study (diagnosis).

Post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation (PIH) is a prevalent and psychologically distressing condition, particularly for individuals with dark skin (Fitzpatrick types III-VI). The heightened susceptibility and severity in this population are linked to unique molecular and structural skin characteristics, including a predisposition to inflammation, which can be exacerbated by conventional treatments like high-concentration chemical peels and aggressive laser therapies. This paper presents a narrative literature review that synthesizes current research on emerging and optimized treatment strategies for PIH in dark-skinned individuals. A focused search of peer-reviewed articles and clinical abstracts revealed that successful management relies on a multi-faceted approach. Key findings include the efficacy and favorable safety profiles of new topical agents such as azelaic acid, adapalene, and cysteamine cream, which possess dual anti-melanogenic and anti-inflammatory properties. Procedural advancements emphasize conservative, low-fluence laser techniques (e.g.,1064-nm Nd:YAG) combined with robust pre- and post-procedure regimens. Most importantly, a consistent, daily photoprotection regimen with broad-spectrum sunscreen is confirmed as the single most effective preventive measure. The review concludes that moving beyond conventional monotherapies to a nuanced, combination-based approach is essential for enhancing outcomes, minimizing adverse effects, and improving the quality of life for individuals with PIH in dark skin.

Background: Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) is a medical and surgical disease of major importance globally. Prognostic models are useful for making decisions in the clinical practice. The aim of this study was to assess the accuracy of International Mission for Prognosis and Analysis of Clinical Trials in TBI(IMPACT) score in predicting outcome in moderate to severe TBI in 6 months. Methods: All patients admitted to Tribhuvan University Teaching Hospital (TUTH) with moderate to severe TBI from April 2019 to February 2020were included in the study. IMPACT scores (core/extended core/ lab) were recorded separately at admission.Outcome was measured with Glasgow Outcome Scale (GOS)at the time of discharge and in six months.Correlation between observed and predicted outcomes was evaluatedbyPearson’s correlation coefficient (r). Sensitivity and specificity were plotted in the receiver-operating characteristic (ROC)curve, and the area under the curve (AUC) was calculated to determine the discrimination ability of this prognostic model. Results: A total of 139 patients were enrolled in the study. Twenty-four (17.3%) patients died within 6 months of TBI, and 40 (28.8%) patients had an unfavorable outcome.Pearson correlation coefficient showed good correlation between observed and predicted outcomes.The ROC curve indicated that all 3 models could accurately discriminate between favorable and unfavorable outcomes, as well as between survival and mortality(unfavorable outcome AUC= 0.905, 0.940, 0.955; mortality AUC= 0.875, 0.914, 0.917 respectively) in our patient population. Conclusions: The IMPACT score is a good prognosticmodel to predict 6-month outcomesin moderate to severeTBI at admission in Nepalese patient population.

Aim: This study aimed to construct and validate a nomogram model to predict the occurrence of severe immune-related adverse events (sirAEs) (≥ 3 grade) in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients receiving transcatheter arterial chemoembolization (TACE) plus immunotherapy. Methods: Data regarding lymphocyte subpopulations and clinical characteristics of 130 HCC patients treated from January 2020 to June 2024 were retrospectively analyzed, including 46 patients with sirAEs and 84 patients without sirAEs. Univariate logistic regression analysis was used to summarize the factors that might affect the occurrence of sirAEs in patients, and then these factors were included in the multivariate logistic regression analysis. These influencing factors were then included in the construction of the nomogram prediction model. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) and calibration curves were used to verify the nomogram prediction model. Results: Multivariate logistic regression analysis indicated that liver cirrhosis, lower value of Neutrophil-to-Lymphocyte Ratio and Regulatory T cell, and higher value of lymphocytes and creatinine were significantly associated with sirAEs (P &lt; 0.05). Based on these factors, a nomogram prediction model for predicting sirAEs after TACE plus immunotherapy in HCC patients was constructed. The area under the ROC curve (AUC) for the prediction model was 0.885 (95% confidence interval: 0.820-0.951), with a cut-off value of 137.786. The model demonstrated a sensitivity of 0.812 and a specificity of 0.889. Conclusion: The nomogram model developed in this study shows promising predictive performance for sirAEs in HCC patients receiving TACE plus immunotherapy; however, further validation in larger, multi-center prospective cohorts is needed to confirm its generalizability and clinical utility.

ABSTRACT This prospective sub-study aimed to compare the diagnostic accuracy of the self-collected anterior nasal swab (ANS; Rhinoswab) against that of healthcare professional (HCP)-collected combined throat and nasal swab (CTN). Eligibility criteria for the study included: &gt;5 years of age, a positive severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) rapid antigen or PCR &lt;72 h prior, and one other participating household member. Samples were tested via reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and included in the analysis where RS and CTN swab were collected on the same day. Indeterminate results were excluded from the analysis. Sensitivity and specificity were used to assess the accuracy of results from self-collected RS. Analysis of the average cycle threshold (Ct) was performed in GraphPad Prism using a paired t -test ( P -value &lt; 0.05, 95% confidence interval [CI]) to assess if there was a significant difference in the Ct values between the HCP-collected CTN swab and the self-collected RS. In total, 583 single-prong result-pairs and 276 double-prong result-pairs were analyzed after exclusion of indeterminate results. The sensitivity of the RS was 84–88.0%, and the specificity was 97–98%. The mean difference in Ct value between the CTN and ANS was ~2 cycles ( P &lt; 0.005, ~2.5 CI 95%) with the raw Ct value of discordant results ~10 Ct values higher than concordant results. Furthermore, the sensitivity from days 1 to 10 was 91–96 to 58–69%, while specificity stayed consistent. Overall, our data support the use of the RS as an alternative nasal sampling tool to traditional CTN swabs collected by HCP. IMPORTANCE In this study, we compared the PCR results of self-collected anterior nasal swabs against healthcare professional-collected combined throat and nasal swabs. The sensitivity and specificity of the anterior nasal swab were considered acceptable when compared to World Health Organization recommendations. The sensitivity of the Rhinoswab ANS was higher at the beginning of the trial when compared with the final day of the trial, regardless of the number of prongs tested via PCR. The self-collected Rhinoswab is a valid tool for community screening of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 in vulnerable populations.

Severe aortic stenosis (AS) represents a major burden among elderly patients, with high mortality once symptoms develop. Transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI) has emerged as an alternative to surgical aortic valve replacement (SAVR), expanding from inoperable to low-risk populations. This systematic review compares short- and long-term outcomes between TAVI and SAVR in patients with severe AS. Following PRISMA 2020 guidelines, PubMed, Scopus, and Web of Science were searched (2010–2025). Eligible randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and comparative cohorts reporting mortality, stroke, pacemaker, or valve durability were included. Twenty-one studies (16 RCTs, 5 registries; n≈23,000) were analyzed. Thirty-day mortality was similar (RR 0.94, 95% CI 0.82–1.07). TAVI reduced bleeding (RR 0.63) and acute kidney injury (RR 0.71) but increased pacemaker implantation (RR 2.46) and paravalvular leak (RR 3.32). Five-year results (PARTNER 3, NOTION) showed comparable survival and valve durability. TAVI provides equivalent survival and superior early recovery compared to SAVR, although conduction disturbances and leak remain limitations. SAVR remains preferred for younger or bicuspid patients pending longer durability data.

Miskomunikasi sering terjadi dalam lingkungan kerja Event Organizer (EO) yang memiliki ritme kerja cepat dan dinamis. Tuntutan untuk menyelesaikan pekerjaan sesuai dengan jadwal yang ketat menjadikan proses komunikasi antarstaf sebagai faktor yang sangat penting. Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk menggambarkan bentuk-bentuk miskomunikasi yang terjadi di lingkungan kerja EO, faktor-faktor penyebabnya, serta dampaknya terhadap kinerja dan kondisi emosional staf. Penelitian ini menggunakan pendekatan kualitatif dengan metode studi kasus. Data dikumpulkan melalui wawancara mendalam dengan staf EO yang terlibat langsung dalam pelaksanaan acara. Hasil penelitian menunjukkan bahwa miskomunikasi umumnya terjadi akibat keterbatasan media komunikasi, ketidakjelasan penyampaian instruksi, serta perubahan informasi yang terjadi secara mendadak. Kondisi tersebut berdampak pada keterlambatan pekerjaan, kesalahan teknis, dan meningkatnya tekanan emosional pada staf. Penelitian ini diharapkan dapat menjadi bahan pertimbangan bagi perusahaan Event Organizer dalam memperbaiki sistem komunikasi internal agar pelaksanaan acara dapat berjalan lebih efektif dan efisien.

Background The burden of lung cancer and the experiences of patients necessitate attention. This study evaluated the disease burden of lung cancer and the attributes of patient-reported outcomes (PROs) in clinical trials pertaining to lung cancer within the Western Pacific Region (WPRO). Methods Drawing upon data from the Global Burden of Disease Study (GBD) 2021, the incidence, mortality, and disability-adjusted life years in the WPRO from 1990 to 2021 was retrieved and analyzed. Clinical trial data conducted within the WPRO spanning from 2010 to 2022 were extracted from International Clinical Trials Registry Platform, encompassing trial phases, study settings, participant demographics, and PRO instruments. Trials were categorized into three groups based on the mention of PRO usage and the utilization of specified PRO instruments. Results In 2021, the WPRO witnessed 1.15 million (95% UI 0.96–1.36) new lung cancer cases and 0.99 million (95% UI 0.82–1.16) deaths. From 1990 to 2021, Singapore showed the most pronounced decline in the age standardized incidence (−38.62, 95% UI −46.63 to −30.99), while China was experiencing the highest increase (32.92, 95% UI 1.21–71.31). Among the 3,889 trials examined, 24.48% trials employed PRO instruments as outcome measures. A majority of these PRO-related trials were conducted in China, Japan, Australia and South Korea, with frequently used PRO instruments including the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Quality of Life Questionnaire-Core 30, the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Quality of Life Questionnaires-Lung Cancer 13, and the Visual Analogue Scale. Conclusion Marked disparities existed in the lung cancer burden among the individual countries in the WPRO. There is a pressing need to allocate further resources toward the implementation of standardized, condition-specific PROs and strategies aimed at minimizing the lung cancer burden, especially in low and low-middle SDI countries.

Abstract Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is linked to both altered gut microbiota and unhealthy diets; however, the mechanistic connections remain elusive. In this study, we conducted a systematic analysis of fecal microbiome metagenomic data, paired with granular dietary assessments and phenotypic profiles, across a cohort of 818 children (462 with ASD, 356 without ASD; mean age = 8.4 years; 27.3% female). By integrating dietary indices, nutrient intake, and food additive exposures, we uncovered ASD-specific linkages to the microbiome. Poor dietary quality correlated with aggregated core autistic symptoms, gastrointestinal complications, and atypical eating behaviors. Notably, children with ASD exhibited a more pronounced diet-microbiome interaction network compared to neurotypical peers, suggesting heightened microbial sensitivity to nutritional inputs. Furthermore, synthetic emulsifiers—specifically polysorbate-80 and carrageenan—were associated with disrupted microbial connectivity in ASD, a phenomenon attenuated in neurotypical children. Our findings elucidate the mechanistic links between dietary factors—particularly synthetic food additives—and microbiome dysregulation in ASD, urging a re-evaluation of dietary guidelines for ASD populations and laying the groundwork for personalized nutritional strategies.

This investigation aimed to assess the therapeutic efficacy of uterine lavage, levamisole, PGF2α, and their combinations in managing 36 subclinical endometritic repeat breeder buffaloes at the Veterinary Clinical Complex, College of Veterinary and Animal Husbandry, Acharya Narendra Deva University of Agriculture and Technology, Kumarganj, Ayodhya, and the State Veterinary Hospital in the surrounding regions of Kumarganj. Thirty-six repeat breeder buffaloes were randomly and evenly allocated into six Groups A (positive control), B (uterine lavage), C (Levamisole), D (PGF2α), E (uterine lavage plus Levamisole), and F (uterine lavage plus PGF2α). The recovery rate in descending orders was noted as 83.33, 83.33, 66.67, 66.67, 50, and 33.33% in Groups F, E, D, C, B, and A, respectively. Moreover, the corresponding conception rates were 66.67, 66.67, 50.00, 50.00, 33.33, and 16.67% Groups F, E, D, C, B, and A, respectively. The recovery rate was significantly higher in Groups E and F; lower in Group B, and intermediate in Groups C and D, as compared to the control. Similar trends were also observed in conception rate. In conclusion, the uterine lavage, along with levamisol or PGF2α, is equally effective in the treatment of endometritis in buffaloes.

Premature Rupture of Membranes (PROM) is one of the obstetric complications that often causes morbidity and mortality in both mothers and infants. This condition occurs when the amniotic membranes rupture before the onset of labor contractions or before the gestational age reaches 37 weeks. PROM increases the risk of intrauterine infection, preterm labor, neonatal sepsis, and asphyxia if not properly managed. This case study aims to describe the application of Evidence Based Practice (EBP) in midwifery care for a woman in labor with PROM at Al-Fatah General Hospital Ambon. The case involved Mrs. D, a 22-year-old woman, G2P1A0, at 34 weeks of gestation, who was admitted to the hospital with complaints of watery discharge from the birth canal accompanied by lower abdominal pain and blood-stained mucus. Examination revealed cervical dilation of 7 cm, absence of membranes, fetal head at Hodge III, and a fetal heart rate of 145 beats per minute. The diagnosis was established as intrapartum stage I active phase with preterm premature rupture of membranes (PPROM). Midwifery management included close observation of labor progress, administration of Ringer’s Lactate infusion, and prophylactic intravenous Cefotaxime according to WHO guidelines. After four hours without progress, collaboration was carried out with an obstetrician, and a cesarean section (SC) was performed due to inadequate labor progression and risk of intrauterine infection. The implementation of EBP in this case proved to enhance maternal and neonatal safety through rapid, rational, and collaborative clinical decision-making. This evidence-based approach reflects Al-Fatah General Hospital Ambon’s commitment to providing safe, effective, and high-quality midwifery care.

Background: Spinal cord injury (SCI) attributable to falls and road injuries imposes a significant burden on working-age individuals; however, its temporal and geographic patterns in this demographic remain underexplored. This study aimed to evaluate the global, regional, and national burden of SCI attributable to falls (SCIF) and road injuries (SCIR) among working-age individuals (aged 15–64 years) from 1990 to 2021 and project trends through 2040. Methods: Using Global Burden of Disease (GBD) 2021 data, global, regional, and national age-standardized incidence rates (ASIR), prevalence rates (ASPR), and years lived with disability rates (ASYR) were assessed according to global parameters and socio-demographic stratification. Trends were quantified by the average annual percentage change (AAPC) and future burdens projected using Bayesian age–period–cohort (BAPC) models. Results: From 1990 to 2021, global ASIR, ASPR, and ASYR for SCIR declined markedly (AAPC −1.54 [95% confidence interval (CI) −1.54 to −1.53], −1.88 [−1.89 to −1.87], and −2.03 [−2.05 to −2.01]), whereas SCIF showed modest or stagnant reductions with regional increases (AAPC −0.24 [−0.27 to −0.22], −0.39 [−0.41 to −0.36], and −0.67 [−0.69 to −0.65]). Males exhibited higher burdens than females, with SCIF increasing with age and peaking at 60–64 years, whereas SCIR shifted toward older groups. High-SDI regions experienced declines in both, whereas middle-SDI areas saw SCIF increases, despite SCIR decreases; low-SDI regions showed slight SCIF rises. Regionally, Western Europe displayed steady reductions, whereas Central Asia experienced an increase in SCIF and Sub-Saharan Africa showed stable or slightly increasing SCIF indicators. National variations were pronounced, with burdens often exceeding SDI expectations in rapidly developing countries. Projections to 2040 indicate a modest rise in SCIF burden (predicted ASIR 3.72 [95% uncertainty interval (UI) 1.82–5.63] per 100 000) but a decrease in SCIR (predicted ASIR 1.22 [0.73–1.72] per 100 000). Conclusions: Although the burden of SCIR has declined substantially from 1990 to 2021 and is projected to continue decreasing, persistent or rising SCIF trends—expected to modestly increase by 2040—alongside male predominance, age shifts, and socioeconomic disparities emphasize the urgency for tailored prevention: enhanced road safety measures and occupational reforms targeting falls in high-risk groups to reduce inequities and socioeconomic costs.

Background: the phenomenon of cancer not only attacks the physical, but also the psychological. One of the actions to deal with physical problems is through elective oncology surgery, which often causes anxiety for patients. This anxiety cannot be considered a small thing because it can have an impact on delaying and even canceling oncology surgery. Objective: this study aims to describe the anxiety level of preoperative patients of elective oncology surgery. Methods: this study employed a descriptive observational study with a cross-sectional approach. Respondents were selected using a purposive sampling technique with specific inclusion and exclusion criteria. Data were collected through the distribution of demographic questionnaires and the Depression Anxiety Stress Scale-21 (DASS-21) questionnaire and analyzed by descriptive statistics. Results: respondents in this study totaled 106, with 56 respondents who did not experience anxiety (52.8%), 27 respondents who experienced moderate anxiety (25.5%), 12 respondents who experienced severe anxiety (11.3%), 11 respondents who experienced mild anxiety (10.4%), and no one experienced panic attacks. Conclusion: most respondents did not experience anxiety, and almost half of the respondent’s experienced anxiety from low to severe levels. Nurses are expected to innovate in providing counseling, information, and education with digital media and technology related to reducing anxiety before oncology surgery, both in the inpatient and outpatient rooms.

Permasalahan gizi remaja merupakan salah satu isu kesehatan prioritas pada remaja putri. Prevelensi anemia di kalangan remaja apabila tidak tertangani dengan baik, maka akan berlanjut dari sistem reproduksi, pada masa kehamilan, persalinan hingga dewasa dan akan berkontribusi besar terhadap angka kematian ibu. Penelitian ini bertujuan untuk mengetahui hubungan kualitas tidur, frekuensi konsumsi junk food, dan kepatuhan konsumsi Tablet Tambah Darah (TTD) dengan kejadian anemia pada remaja. Penelitian ini dilakukan pada bulan Agustus 2025 di SMA Muhammadiyah 1 Palembang. Jenis penelitian kuantitatif menggunakan metode survey analitik dengan cross sectional populasi pada penelitian ini adalah 633 dan sampel sebanyak 87 responden diambil dari data primer teknik stratified random sampling. Data penelitian ini diperoleh melalui proses wawancara dan instrumen kuesioner. Analisis data menggunakan uji statistik chi square. Hasil analisis univariat dari 87 responden yang mengalami anemia berjumlah 33 orang (37,9%) dan hasil yang tidak anemia berjumlah 54 orang (62,1%), kualitas tidur baik sebanyak 54 (62,1%), tidak sering mengkonsumsi junk food sebanyak 50 (57,5%), dan patuh mengkonsumsi TTD 53 (60,9%). Penelitian ini dapat disimpulkan bahwa ada hubungan kualitas tidur (p value 0,000), frekuensi konsumsi junk food (p value 0,000), dan kepatuhan konsumsi TTD (p value 0,000), dengan kejadian anemia pada remaja putri di SMA Muhammadiyah 1 Palembang Tahun 2025.